---
book: Romans
chapter: 1
next: chapter-02
title: Romans 1
translation: WNT
type: chapter
weight: 1
---

## Romans Chapter 1

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Paul, bond-servant of-Christ Jesus, called (to be an) apostle, set-apart to (the) gospel of-God, 2which he-promised-beforehand through the prophets of-him in (the) holy scriptures 3about the Son of-him, the-one having-arisen from (the) seed of-David according-to (the) flesh, 4the-one designated (the) Son of-God with power according-to (the) Spirit of-holiness out-of (the) resurrection of-(the)-dead, Jesus Christ the Lord of-us, 5through whom we-received grace and apostleship unto (the) obedience of-faith among all the Gentiles on-behalf-of the name of-him, 6among whom you also (are) called-ones of-Jesus Christ, 7to-all the beloved-ones of-God being in Rome, called (to be) holy. Grace (be) to-you and peace from God (the) Father of-us and (the) Lord Jesus Christ.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v8"><sup class="verse-num">8</sup> First, I-thank the God of-me through Jesus Christ about all of-you, because the faith of-you is-being-proclaimed in the whole world. 9For [the] God is (the) witness of-me, whom I-serve in the Spirit/spirit of-me in the gospel of-the Son of-him as I┘constantly└make remembrance of-you 10always in the prayers of-me, asking somehow2 now at-last it-will-be-possible-for (me) in the will of-[the] God to-come to you. 11For I-long to-see you in-order-that I-may-share┘some spiritual gift└with you unto [the] your being-established, 12now, that is, (unto) being-encouraged-with [in] you by the among one-another faith of┘both└you and me. 13And I-do┘not└want you to-be-ignorant, brothers, that many-times I-purposed to-come to you, and I-was-prevented until the here in-order-that I-might-have some fruit also among you as also in the remaining Gentiles. 14I-am (a) debtor both to-Gentiles and barbarians, both to-wise and foolish, 15thus-as-respects-the willingness according-to me to-preach also to you [the-ones] in Rome.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v16"><sup class="verse-num">16</sup> For I-am┘not└ashamed-of the gospel, for it-is (the) power of-God unto salvation to-everybody [the-one] believing, both to-(the) Jew first and to-(the)-Gentile. 17For by it (the) righteousness of-God is-being-revealed from faith to faith, as it-has-been-written, "Now the just-one is-to-live by faith."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v18"><sup class="verse-num">18</sup> For (the) wrath of-God is-being-revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of-men the-ones suppressing the truth with unrighteousness, 19because [the] known-thing of-[the] God is manifest in them, for [the] God manifested (it) to-them. 20For the invisible-things of-him from (the) creation of-(the)-world are-seen-clearly by-the-things made, even2 (the) eternal power and godness of-him, unto [the] their being without-excuse; 21because, having-known [the] God they-did┘not└glorify (him) as God or were-thankful, but were-given-over-to-empty-speculation in the reasonings of-them and their senseless heart of-them was-darkened. 22Claiming to-be wise, they-became fools, 23and exchanged the glory of-the incorruptible God into (the) likeness of-(the)-image of-corruptible man and birds and four-footed animals and reptiles.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v24"><sup class="verse-num">24</sup> Wherefore [the] God gave┘them└up in the lusts of-[the] hearts of-them to uncleanness to-[the] dishonoring-of the bodies of-them among themselves, 25who exchanged the truth of-[the] God for the/a lie and worshiped and served the creation rather-than the-one having-created—who is blessed forever. Amen. 26On-account-of this [the] God gave┘them└up to passions of-dishonor, for even the females of-them exchanged the natural function for the-one contrary-to nature, 27and likewise also the males, leaving the natural function of-the female burned in the elicit-desire of-them toward one-another, males with males committing [the] shamefulness, and receiving-back in themselves the repayment that was-necessary for-the error of-them. 28And even-as they-dids┘not└see-fit to have [the] God in (their) knowledge, [the] God gave┘them└up to depravity of-mind, 29being-filled with-all unrighteousness, wickedness, greed, malice, full-of jealousy, murder, strife, deception, meanness; (they are) gossips, 30slanderers, God-haters, arrogant people, boasters, disloyal, schemers of-evil-(things), disobedient to-parents, 31without understanding, untrustworthy, unloving, unmerciful, 32who, knowing the requirement of-[the] God, that the-ones practicing [the] such-things are worthy of-death, not only do them but also delight-in the-ones doing (them).</span>
