---
book: Romans
chapter: 7
next: chapter-08
prev: chapter-06
title: Romans 7
translation: WNT
type: chapter
weight: 7
---

## Romans Chapter 7

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Or are-you-ignorant, brothers—for I-am-speaking to-ones-knowing (the) Law—that the law rules the/a person for such┘time└as he is alive? 2For the/a married woman is-bound by-Law to-the/a living husband. But if the/a husband dies, she-is-released from the law of-the husband. 3So then, the husband living, she-will-be called (an) adulteress if she-becomes to-another man. But if the/a husband dies, she-is-free from the law, unto her not being (an) adulteress, having-become to-another man; 4so-that, my brothers, you also were-put-to-death with-respect-to-the Law through the body of-[the] Christ, unto [the] your becoming to-another, to-the-one having-been-raised from (the) dead in-order-that we-might-bear-fruit to-[the] God. 5For when we-were in the flesh, the passions/lusts of-[the] sins that (were) through the Law were-at-work in the members of-us unto [the] bearing-fruit to-[the] death. 6But now we-were-released from the Law, having-died in that-to-which we-were-held-fast with-the-result-that us to-be-serving in (the) newness of-(the)-spirit, and not (in the) oldness of-(the)-letter.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v7"><sup class="verse-num">7</sup> So what will-we-say then? (Is) the Law sinful? May-it┘not└be! But, I-did┘not└know [the] sin if not through (the) Law, for also I would┘not└have-known [the] lust/covetousness if the law were┘not└saying, "You shall┘not└covet." 8But [the] sin having-taken opportunity through the commandment began-to-work in me all covetousness. For apart-from law sin (is) dead. 9But I was-living apart-from (the) Law at-one-time, but the commandment having-come, [the] sin came-to-life. 10And I died, and the commandment [the] unto life—this was-found (to be) unto death for-me. 11For [the] sin, having-taken opportunity through the commandment, led┘me└astray, and killed me through it, 12so-that the Law (is) holy, and the commandment (is) holy and just and good.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v13"><sup class="verse-num">13</sup> Then did the/a good-thing become (a cause of) death to-me? May-it┘not└be! But [the] sin, in-order-that it-might-be-appear as-sin, through the good produced for-me death, in-order-that [the] sin through the commandment might-become sinful according-to (the) extreme. 14For we-know that the Law is spiritual, but I am physical sold-like-(a)-slave under [the] sin. 15For what I am-producing I-do┘not└know. For what I-do┘not└want—this I-do, but what I-hate—this I-do. 16Now if what I-do┘not└want—this I-do, I-agree-with the Law that (it is) good. 17And now I am┘not└producing it anymore, but the sin dwelling in me (is doing it). 18For I-know that in me (a) good-thing does┘not└dwell—that is, in the flesh of-me. For the desiring is-present-with me, but [the] producing the good-thing . . . no. 19For what good-thing I-want I-do┘not└do, but what evil-thing I-do┘not└want—this I-practice. 20Now if what [I]ms do┘not└want—this I-do, I am┘no-longer└producing it, but the sin living in me (is doing it). 21Then I-find the principle for me the-one desiring to-do [the] good-thing, that [the] evil-thing lies-with me. 22For I-delight-in the Law of-[the] God according-to the inner man. 23But I-see another principle in the members of-me, warring-against the principle of-the mind of-me and imprisoning me in the principlem of-[the] sinf the-onem being in the members of-me. 24I (am a) miserable man! Who will-rescue me from the body of-[the] this death? 25Now thanks (be) to-[the] God through Jesus Christ the Lord of us! So then I myself am slave to (the) principle of-God with-the mind, but to-(the)-principle of-sin with-the flesh.</span>
