---
title: "Jude 24-25"
date: '2024-02-25'
author: "Virgil Warren, christir.org"
categories:
- Ministry
- Communion Meditations
- '2024'
draft: false
---

<p><em>“To the One that can present you faultless with great joy before the only God our Savior, be glory . . . forevermore</em><em>.</em><em>”</em> On that Great Day we don’t have to feel like he is looking at us with our accumulated past sins and mistakes in mind. He will be looking at us as we are then, which grows out of the message in these emblems.</p>
<p>Here is something of how it works. When I was about twelve, I missed the curve in our driveway and drove our 1946 Ford Fergusen tractor over an iron post near the lane. The post bent over and then popped up again behind the radiator before I could get the tractor stopped. Instead of leaving bad enough alone, I backed the tractor up and ran that post through the radiator.</p>
<p>Fast forward sixty years. My family drove from Kansas to visit Dad in a care home in Dillsboro, Indiana. He was glad to see me; he was not thinking about the expensive radiator repair I had caused him. He saw me as a grown man with a nice wife and four happy kids. Steve blew up a nurse’s glove and started batting it around the room with David, Tara, and Michelle. Dad was laughing.</p>
<p>What we are remembering in these emblems established the basis for our being accepted as faultless before God. That fact looks forward to the Great Day when Christ presents us faultless. God will be glad to see us as we are then.</p>
