---
book: John
chapter: 14
next: chapter-15
prev: chapter-13
title: John 14
translation: WNT
type: chapter
weight: 14
---

## John Chapter 14

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Do┘not└let┘the heart of-youpl└be-troubled. You-believe in [the] God; believe also in me. 2In the house of-the Father of-me (there)-are many rooms. And if not, I┘would└have told you, because I-am-going to-prepare (a) place for-you. 3And if I-go and prepare (a) place for-you, I-am-coming again and will-receive you to myself, in-order-that where I am you may-be also. 4And where I am-going you-know the way." 5Thomas says to-him, "Lord, we-do┘not└know where you-are-going; how are-we-able to-know the way?" 6[The] Jesus says to-him, "I am the way, and the truth and the life; nobody comes to the Father except2 through me. 7If you-have-known me, you-will-know the Father of-me also. And from now you-know him and have-seen him." 8Philip says to-him, "Lord, show us the Father, and it-will-be-sufficient for-us." 9[The] Jesus says to-him, "I-am with you such-(a)-long time, and you-have┘not└known me, Philip? The-one having-seen me has-seen the Father. How do┘you└say, 'Show the Father to us'? 10You-believe, do┘(you)└not, that I (am) in the Father and the Father is in me? The word that I say to-you I-do┘not└say from myself, but the Father remaining in me does the works of-him. 11Do-you-believe me that I (am) in the Father and the Father (is) in me? And if not, believe on-account-of the works themselves. 12Truly, truly, I-say to you, the-one believing in me—the works that I do that-one-also will-do, and greater-things than-these will-he-do, because I am-going to the Father. 13And whatever3 you-ask in the name of-me—this-thing I-will-do, in-order-that the Father may-be-glorified in the Son. 14If you-ask me anything in the name of-me, I-will-do (it). 15"If you-love me, you-will-keep [the] my [the] commandments. 16And-I will-ask the Father, and he-will-give to-you another Comforter, in-order-that he-may-be with you forever3, 17the Spirit of-[the] truth, that the world is┘not└able to-receive, because it-does┘not└see him, or know (him). You know him because he-remains with you, and will-be in you. 18I-will┘not└leave you orphans; I-am-coming to you. 19Yet (a) little (while) and the world no-longer sees me, but you will-see me, because I live and you will-live. 20In that [the] day you will-know that I (am) in the Father of-me and you (are) in me and-I (am) in you. 21The-one having the commandments of-me and keeping them—that-one is the-one loving me. And the-one loving me will-be-loved by the Father of-me, and-I will-love him, and I-will-manifest myself to-him." 22Judas, not [the] Iscariot, says to him, "Lord, [and]ms what is (it) that you will manifest yourself to-us and not to-the world?" 23Jesus answered and said to-him, "If anybody loves me, he-will-keep the word of-me, and the Father of-me will-love him, and we-will-come to him and make (a) place-to-stay with him. 24The-one not loving me does┘not└keep the word of-me. And the word that you-hear is not mine but of-the having-sent me Father. 25"I-have-spoken these-things to-you, remaining with you. 26And/But the Comforter, the Holy [the] Spirit, that the Father will-send in the name of-me—that-one will-teach you all-things and remind┘of└of all-things that [I]ms said to-you. 27I-leave peace for-you; I-give my [the] peace to-you; I-am┘not└giving to-you like the world gives. Do┘not└let┘the heart of-you└be-troubled, nor let-it-be-afraid. 28You-heard that I said to-you, 'I-am-going-away, and I-am-coming to you.' If you loved me, you┘would└rejoice that I-am-going to the Father, because the Father is greater than I. 29And now I-have-told you before (it) happens, in-order-that when it-does-happen, you-may-believe. 30No-longer will-I-say many-things with you; for the ruler of-the world is-coming, and he-has nothing in me. 31But in-order-that the world may-know that I-love the Father, and as the Father commanded me, thus I-do. Get-up, let-us-go from here.</span>
