---
book: John
chapter: 15
next: chapter-16
prev: chapter-14
title: John 15
translation: WNT
type: chapter
weight: 15
---

## John Chapter 15

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> I am the true [the] vine and the Father of-me is the husbandman. 2Every branch in me not bearing fruit he-takes┘[it]└out, and every (branch) bearing fruit he-prunes [it} in-order-that it-may-bear more fruit. 3Already you are pruned on-account-of the word that I-have-spoken to-you. 4Remain in me, and-I in you. As the branch is┘not└able to-bear fruit from itself unless2 it-remains in the vine; so you neither unless2 you-remain in me. 5I am the vine; your (are) the branches. The-one remaining in me and-I in him—this-one bears much fruit, because without me you-are┘not└able to-do anything. 6Unless2 somebody remains in me, he-will-be-thrown out like the/a branch and wither, and they-gather-up and throw (them) into the fire, and they-are-burned-up. 7If you-remain in me and the words of-me remain in you, whatever2 you-want, ask, and it-will-become to-you. 8In/By this the Father of-you with-be-glorified: that you-bear much fruit and become disciples to-me. 9As the Father loved me, I-also loved you; remain in [the] my [the] love. 10If you-keep the commandments of-me, you-will-remain in the love of-me, as I have-kept the commandments of-the Father of-me and remain in the love of-him. 11I-have-said these-things to-you in-order-that [the] my [the] joy may-be in you, and the joy of-you may-be-full. 12This is [the] my [the] commandment: that you-love one-another as I-loved you. 13Nobody has greater love than-this: that somebody lay-down the life of-himself on-behalf-of the friends of-him. 14You are friends of-me if you-do what I command you. 15No-longer do-I-call you servants, because the/a servant does┘not└know what the lord of-him is-doing; but I-have-called you friends because all that I-heard from the Father of-me I-made-known to-you. 16You did┘not└choose me, but I chose you and appointed you in-order-that you may-go and bear fruit, and the fruit of-you may-remain in-order-that whatever2 you┘[would] └ask the Father in the name of-me I-might-give (it) to-you. 17I-command you these-things in-order-that you-may-love one-another. 18"If the world hates you, you-know that it-has-hated me first. 19If you-were of the world, the world would be-friendly-to [the] its-own, but because you-are not of the world—but I-chose you out-of the world—on-account-of this the world hates (you). 20You remember the word that I said to-you, 'A slave is not greater than-the lord of-him.' If they-persecuted me, they-will┘also└persecute you. If they-kept the word of-me, they-will┘also└keep [the] yours. 21But they-will-do all these-things to you on-account-of the name of-me, because they-do┘not└know the-One having-sent me. 22If I-had┘not└come and spoken to-them, they-would┘not└have sin. But now they-do┘not└have (an) excuse for the sin of-them. 23The-one hating me also hates the Father of-me. 24If I had┘not└done among them the works that nobody else did, they would┘not└have sin. But now they-have┘both└seen and hate both me and the Father of-me. 25But (this has happened) in-order-that the word [the] written in the Law of-them might-be-fulfilled [that],</span>

<span class="verse" id="v26"><sup class="verse-num">26</sup> When the Comforter comes whom I will-send you from the Father, the Spirit of-[the] truth that comes from the Father—that-one will-bear-witness with me. 27And you also bear-witness because you-are with me.</span>
