---
book: Luke
chapter: 8
next: chapter-09
prev: chapter-07
title: Luke 8
translation: WNT
type: chapter
weight: 8
---

## Luke Chapter 8

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> And it-happened on the next (day)2/soon afterward2 and/that he was-traveling according-to (the) city2/from one city to another2, preaching and announcing-the-good-news-about the kingdom of-[the] God; and the twelve (were) with him, 2and some women who were healed from evil spirits and sicknesses: Mary, the-one called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had-come-out; 3and Joanna, (the) wife of-Chuza, (the) manager of-Herod; and Susanna, and many others, who were-ministering to-them out-of the-things being to-them.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v4"><sup class="verse-num">4</sup> And (a) large crowd coming-together, and the-ones from every city traveling to him, he-spoke through parables. 5"The/A sowing-one went-out to-sow the seed of-him, and in-[the] his sowing, some fell beside the road and they-were-walked-on, and the birds of-the sky devoured it/them. 6And other (seed) fell on the rocky-ground and having-sprouted it/they-shriveled-up on-account-of not to-have-moisture. 7And other (seed) fell in (the) midst of-[the] thorns; and the thorns, having-grown-up, choked┘it/them└out. 8And other (seed) fell on [the] good [the] ground and, having-grown-up, produced fruit (a) hundredfold." Saying these-things, he-called-out, "The-one having ears to-hear, let-him-hear."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v9"><sup class="verse-num">9</sup> And the disciples of-him were asking him what this [the] parable would-be. 10And the/he said, "To-you it-has-been-given to-know the mysteries of-the kingdom of-[the] God, but to-the rest (it comes) in parables in-order-that, 11"This is the parable. The seed is the word of-[the] God. 12And the-ones beside the road are the-ones-having-heard; then the devil comes and takes the seed from the heart of-them, in-order-that, not having-believed, they-might-be-saved. 13And the-ones on the rocky-ground (are) who when they-hear (it) receive the word with joy, and these do┘not└have root, who believe for (a) time and in (the) time of-temptation they-fall-away. 14And the (seed) having-fallen among the thorns—these are the-ones having-heard and, going, they-are-choked-out by cares and wealth and pleasures of-life, and they-do┘not└produce. 15But the (seed) on the good ground—these are who with (a) good and upright heart, having-heard, hold-fast and produce by persevering. 16"And nobody, having-lit (a) lamp, hides it with-a-vessel or puts (it) under (a) bed, but puts (it) on (a) lampstand in-order-that the-ones coming–in may-see the light. 17For it-is not hidden that will┘not└be manifest, and not secret that will┘not└be made-know and will-come to (the) light. 18So watch how you-hear. For whoever2 has, it-will-be-given to-him, and whoever2 does not have, even what he-seems to-have will-be-taken-away from him."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v19"><sup class="verse-num">19</sup> And the/his mother came to him and the brothers of-him, and they-were┘not└able to-get-to him on-account-of the crowd. 20And it-was-reported to-him, "The mother of-you and the brothers of-you are-standing outside wanting to-see you."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v21"><sup class="verse-num">21</sup> And the/he, having-answered, said to them, "(The) mother of-me and brothers of-me—these are the–ones hearing the word of-[the] God and doing (it)."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v22"><sup class="verse-num">22</sup> And it-happened on one of-the days and/that he got in (a) boat and the disciples of-him, and he-said to them, "Let-us-go-through to the other-side of-the lake," and they-set-off. 23And they sailing, he-went-to-sleep, and (a) storm of-wind came-down onto the lake, and they-were-taking-on water and were-in-danger.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v24"><sup class="verse-num">24</sup> And having-come, they-woke┘him└up, saying, "Master, Master, we-are-perishing!" And the/he, having-gotten-up, rebuked the wind and the waves of-[the] water, and they-ceased and (a) great calm became.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v25"><sup class="verse-num">25</sup> And he-said to-them, "Where (is) the faith of-you?" And having-feared, they-marveled, saying to one-another, "Who then is this that he-commands even the winds and the water, and they-obey him?"</span>

<span class="verse" id="v26"><sup class="verse-num">26</sup> And they-sailed to the region of-the Gerasenes, which is across-from [the] Galilee. 27And (a)-certain man out-of the city met him—getting out-of the boat onto [the] land, having demons and for-(a)-long time he-did┘not└wear (a) garment, and he-was┘not└staying in (a) house, but in [the] tombs. 28And having-seen [the] Jesus, having-cried-out, he-fell-before him and said in-(a)-loud voice, "What to-me and to-you, Jesus, Son of-[the] God [the] Most-High? I-beg you, do┘not└torment me." 29For he-commanded the unclean [the] spirit to-come-out from the man; for it-would seize him many times, and he-was-bound with chains and shackles, being-under-guard; and breaking the bonds, he-would-be-driven by the demon into [the] unpopulated-places.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v30"><sup class="verse-num">30</sup> And [the] Jesus asked him, "What is (the) name to-you?" And the/he said, "Legion," because many demons entered into him. 31And they-started-urging him [in-order]-that he-might┘not└order them to-go-away into the abyss. 32And (a) sizable herd of-pigs was there feeding on the mountain; and they-were-urging him [in-order]-that he-might-let them enter into those, and he-let them. 33And the demons, having-come-out from the man, entered into the pigs, and the herd stampeded down the steep-place into the lake and were-drowned. 34And having-seen the-thing happened, the herdsmen fled and reported in the city and in the countryside. 35And they went-out to-see the-thing happened, and they-came to [the] Jesus and found the man from whom the demons went-out, clothed and in-his-right-mind, sitting at the feet of-[the] Jesus; and they-were-afraid. 36And the-ones having-seen how the-one having-been-demon-possessed was-saved, reported. 37And all the multitude of-the area of-the Gerasenes asked him to-go-away from them, because they-were-seized with-(a)-great fear. And he, having-gotten in (the) boat, started-to-return. 38And the man from whom he-had-cast-out the demons was-begging him to-be with him; but he-dismissed him, saying, 39"Return to the house of-you and recount as-many-things-as [the] God did for-you." And he-went-away according-to the whole city preaching as-many-things-as [the] Jesus did for him.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v40"><sup class="verse-num">40</sup> And in [the] Jesus' [the] returning, the crowd welcomed him. For all were waiting-for him. 41And behold, (a) man. to-whom (the) name Jairus, came, and this-one was (a) ruler of-the synagogue. And having-fallen at the feet of-[the]ms Jesus, he-was-appealing-to him to-enter into the house of-him, 42because (an) only daughter was to-him of┘about└twelve years, and she was-dying. And in [the] his going, the crowds were-pressing him. 43And (a) woman being with (a) flow/hemorrhage of-blood from twelve years, who, having-spent all the/her living-on doctors, was┘not└able to-be-healed by nobody/anybody; 44having-come from-behind, touched the fringe of-the garment of-him and immediately the flow/hemorrhage of-[the] blood stopped.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v45"><sup class="verse-num">45</sup> And [the] Jesus said, "Who (is) the-one having-touched me?" And all denying (it), [the] Peter said, "Master, the crowds are-pressing you and jostling (you)."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v46"><sup class="verse-num">46</sup> But [the] Jesus said, "Who touched me, for I-know power gone-out from me."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v47"><sup class="verse-num">47</sup> And the woman, having-seen that she-did┘not└escape-notice, trembling, came and having-fallen-down-to him, on-account-of which reason she-touched him she-admitted before all the people and as she-was┘immediately└healed. 48And the/he said to-her, Daughter, the faith of-you has-saved you. Go in peace."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v49"><sup class="verse-num">49</sup> He yet speaking, somebody comes from (the house) of-the synagogue-ruler, saying [that], "The daughter of-you has-died; no-longer trouble the Teacher."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v50"><sup class="verse-num">50</sup> But [the] Jesus, having-heard, replied to-him, "Do┘not└fear, only believe, and she-will-be-saved." 51And having-gone into the house, he-did┘not└allow anybody to-enter with him except Peter and John and James and the father and the mother of-the child. 52All were-crying and bewailing her. And the/he said, "Do┘not└go-on-crying, for she-did┘not└die, but she-is-sleeping." 53And they-began-to-laugh-at him, knowing that she-died. 54But he, having-taken the hand of-her, spoke-loudly, saying, "[The] child, get-up." 55And the breath of-her returned and she-stood-up, and he-commanded (something) to-be-given to-her to-eat. 56And the parents of-her were-amazed, and the/he charged them to-tell-nobody the-thing having-happened.</span>
