---
book: Matthew
chapter: 13
next: chapter-14
prev: chapter-12
title: Matthew 13
translation: WNT
type: chapter
weight: 13
---

## Matthew Chapter 13

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> In [the] that day having-come-out of-the house, [the] Jesus sat-down beside the sea. 2And many crowd[s] were-gathered-together to him, so-that he, having-gotten in (a) boat, sat-down, and all the crowd was-standing on the shore. 3And he-said to-them many-things in parables, saying, "Behold, the/a sowing-one went-out [the] to-sow. 4And in [the] his sowing some fell beside the road, and the birds, having-come, devoured them. 5And others fell on [the] rocky-ground where it-did┘not└have much soil, and immediately it-sprang on-account-of [the] not having depth of-soil. 6And (the) sun having-risen-high, it-was-scorched and on-account-of [the] not having root it-dried-up. 7And others fell to [the] thorns, and the thorns grew-up and choked┘it└out. 8But others fell on [the] good [the] ground and were-bearing fruit, some (a) hundred, some sixty, and some thirty. 9The-one having ears, let┘him└hear."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v10"><sup class="verse-num">10</sup> And having-come-to-(him), the disciples of-him said to-him,</span>

<span class="verse" id="v11"><sup class="verse-num">11</sup> And the/he, having-answered, said to-them, "Because it-has-been-given to-you to-know the mysteries of-the kingdom of-[the] heaven[s], but it-is┘not└given to-them. 12For who has, it-will-be-given to-him and he-will-be-increased. And who does┘not└have, even what he-has will-be-taken from him. 13On-account-of this I-am-speaking to-them in parables, because, seeing, they-do┘not└see and, hearing, they-do┘not└hear nor understand, 14and the prophecy of-Isaiah is-fulfilled, the-one saying,</span>

<span class="verse" id="v15"><sup class="verse-num">15</sup> For the heart of-[the] this people became insensitive, 16"But blessed (are) the eyes of-you because they-see, and the ears of-you because they-hear. 17For truly I-say to-you that many prophets and righteous-(men) wanted to-see what-things you-see and did┘not└see (them), and to-hear what-things you-hear and did┘not└hear (them). 18"So you hear the parable of-the sowing-one. 19All hearing the word of-the kingdom and not understanding, the evil one comes and snatches the (seed) sown in the heart of-him, this it the-one sown beside the road. 20And the-one having-been-sown on the rocky-ground[s]—this is the-one hearing the word and immediately receiving it with joy; 21but he-does┘not└have root in himself, but is temporary; and trouble and persecution coming on-account-of the word, immediately he-gives-up. 22And the-one sown among the thorns—this-one is the-one hearing the word, and the cares of-the world and the deceitfulness of-[the] wealth choke[s]-out the word and it-becomes unfruitful. 23And the-one sown on [the] good [the] ground—this-one is the-one hearing the word and understanding (it), who indeed bears-fruit and bears some (a) hundred, and some sixty, and some thirty."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v24"><sup class="verse-num">24</sup> And he-presented another parable to-them, saying, "The kingdom of-[the] heaven[s] is like (a) man sowing clean seed in the field of-him. 25And in [the] men's sleeping, the/an enemy of-him came and planted darnels in (the) midst of-the wheat and went-away. 26And when the plants grew and made yield, then the darnels also appeared. 27And the servants of-the owner, having-come-to (him), said to-him, 'Sir, did-you┘not└sow clean seed in [the] your field? So where┘did┘┘ darnels └└come └from?' 28And the/he said to-them, '(A) enemy man did this.' And the servants say to-him, 'Do-you-want, therefore, having-gone, (that) we gather┘them└up?' 29And the/he said, 'No, lest gathering the darnels, you uproot the wheat with them. 30Let┘both└grow until the harvest, and at (the) time of-the harvest I-will-say to-the reapers, "Gather first the darnels and bind them into bundles unto [the] burning┘them└up, and the wheat gather into the granary of-men."'"</span>

<span class="verse" id="v31"><sup class="verse-num">31</sup> He-presented another parable to-them, saying, "The kingdom of-[the] heaven[s] is like (a) seed of-mustard, that (a) man, having-taken, planted in the field of-him, 32which is smaller than-all the seeds; but when it-grows, it-is bigger than-the garden-plants, and becomes (a) tree so-that [the] birds of-the sky come and nest in the branches of-it."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v33"><sup class="verse-num">33</sup> He-spoke another parable to-them. "The kingdom of-[the] heaven[s] is like yeast that, having-taken, (a) woman hid in three satons of-meal until2 it-leavened (the) whole." 34[The] Jesus spoke all these-things in parables to-the crowd[s] and with (a) parable he-spoke nothing to-them, 35in-order-that they-thing having-been-spoken might-be-fulfilled through the prophet, saying,</span>

<span class="verse" id="v36"><sup class="verse-num">36</sup> Then having-left the crowd[s], he-went into the house, and the disciples of-him came-to him, saying, "Explain to-us the parable of-the darnels of-the field."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v37"><sup class="verse-num">37</sup> And the/he, having-answered, said, "The-One sowing the clean seed is the Son of-[the] Man, 38and the field is the world, and the good seed—these are the sons of-the kingdom. The darnels are the sons of-the evil-one. 39And the enemy (is) the-one having-sown them is the devil, and the harvest is (the) end of-(the)-world, and the reapers are angels. 40So even-as the darnels are-gathered and burned-up with-fire, so it-will-be in the end of-the world. 41The Son of-[the] man will-send the angels of-him, and they-will-gather out-of the kingdom of-him all the-things causing-stumbling and the-ones doing lawlessness, 42and they-will-throw them into the furnace of-[the] fire; [the] weeping and gnashing of-[the] teeth will-be there. 43The the righteous will-shine like the sun in the kingdom of-the Father of-them. The-one having ears, let-him-hear. 44"The kingdom of-[the] heaven[s] is like treasure hidden in the/a field, that (a) Man, having-found, hid; and from the joy of-him he-goes and sells as-many-things-as he-has, and buys [the] that field. 45"Again the kingdom of-[the] heaven is like (a) merchant man looking-for beautiful pearls. 46And having-found one expensive pearl, having-gone-away, he-has-sold all-things as-many-as he-had and bought it. 47"Again the kingdom of-[the] heaven is like (a) net having-been-cast into the sea and having-gathered out-of every kind, which 48when it-was filled, having-drawn out-of every kind onto the shore and having-sat-down, they-put the good-ones into containers, but the worthless ones they-threw out. 49Thus it-will-be in the end of-the world. The angels will-go-out and they-will-separate the bad from (the) midst of-the righteous, 50and they-will-throw them into the furnace of-[the] fire. [The] weeping and [the] gnashing of-[the] teeth will-be there. 52And he-said to-them, "On-account-of this every scribe made-(a)-disciple of-the kingdom of-[the] heaven[s] is like (a) house-owner man who takes-out of the treasure of-him things-new and old." 53And it-happened when [the] Jesus finished [the] these parables, he-left from-there. 54And having-come into the home-town of-him, he-began-to-teach in the synagogue of-them, so-that their being-amazed and saying, "Whence to this-one (is) [the] this wisdom and the miracles/powers? 55This is the son of-the carpenter, is-it not? Is the mother of-him not called Mary and the brothers of-him (are James and Joses and Simon and Jude? 56And the sisters of-him—are-they not all with us? Whence then (are) all these-things to-this-one?" 57And they-were-being-put-off by him, and [the] Jesus said to-them, "(A) prophet is not without-honor except in the home-town of-him and in the house (of him)." 58And he-did┘not└do many miracles there on-account-of the disbelief of-them.</span>
