---
book: Matthew
chapter: 6
next: chapter-07
prev: chapter-05
title: Matthew 6
translation: WNT
type: chapter
weight: 6
---

## Matthew Chapter 6

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> [And]ms be-careful not to-do the righteousness of-you in-front-of [the] men/people unto [the] being-seen by them. And if not, you-do┘not└have (a) reward from the Father of-you in [the] heaven[s]. 2"So when you-do alms, do┘not└blow (a) trumpet in-front-of you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets in-order-that they-may-be-glorified by [the] men. Truly I-say to-you, they-have the reward of-them. 3But you doing alms, let┘the left (hand) of-you not└know what the right (hand) of-you is-doing, 4in-order-that the alms of-you may-be in [the] secret, and the Father of-you the-One seeing in [the] secret will-reward you. 5"And when you-praypl, do┘not└be like the hypocrites, because they-love to-pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of-the streets, in-order-that they-may-appear to-[the] men. Truly I-say to-you, they-have the reward of-them. 6And when yousg pray, go into the private-room of-you and having-shut the door of-you, pray to-the Father of-you in [the] secret; and the Father of-you the-One seeing in [the] secret will-reward you. 7And prayingpl, do┘not└babble like the Gentiles; they-suppose that they-will-be-listened-to in [the] much-speaking of-them. 8So do┘not└be-like them, for the Father of-you knows of-what-things you-have need before [the] knows of-what-things you-have need before [the] your asking him. 9Thus therefore you pray:</span>

<span class="verse" id="v14"><sup class="verse-num">14</sup> For if you-forgive for-[the] men the trespasses of-them, the heavenly [the] Father of-you will┘also└forgive you. 15But if you-do┘not└forgive [the] men, neither will┘the Father of-you└forgive the trespasses of-you. 16"And when you-fastpl, do┘not└be gloomy like the hypocrites, for they-neglect the faces of-them in-order-that they-may-appear fasting to-[the] men, Truly I-say to-you, they-have the reward of-them. 17But yousg, fasting, anoint the head of-you and wash the face of-you, 18in-order-that you-may┘not└appear fasting to-[the] men, but to-the Father of-you in [the] secret, and the Father of-you the-One seeing in [the] secret will-reward you. 19"Do treasure-up for-youpl treasures on the earth where moth and rust ruin and where thieves break-in and steal. 20But treasure-up for-you treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust ruin, and where thieves do┘not└break-in nor steal. 21For where the treasure of-you is, there the heart of-you will-be also. 22"The lamp of-the body is the eye. If then the eye of-you is healthy, the whole body of-you will-be full-of-light. 23But if the eye of-you is bad, the whole body of-you will-be-full-of darkness. So if the light [the] in you is darkness, how-great the darkness! 24"Nobody is-able to-serve two lords, for either he-will-disregard the one and regard the other, or he-will-be-loyal-to the one and look-down-on the other. You-are┘not└able to-serve God and money. 25"On-account-of this I-say to-you, do┘not└worry-about the life of-you what you-will-eat [or what you-will-drink]ms, neither the body of-you what you-will-wear. Is┘not└ [the] life more than [the] food and the body than-[the] clothing? 26Look at the birds of-the sky because they-do┘not└sow, neither do-they-reap, nor do-they-gather into barns, and the heavenly [the] Father of-you feeds them. Are you┘not└worth more than-they? 27And who of you, worrying, is-able to-add one cubit to the height of-you? 28And about clothes why do-you-worry? Observe how they lilies of-the field grow. They-do┘not└labor nor spin. 29And I-say to-you that not-even Solomon in all the glory of-him used-to-be-clothed like one of-these. 30And if [the] God thus clothes the plants of-the field, being today and tomorrow being-cast into (an) oven, (will-he┘) not more by-much└ (clothe) you, little-faith-ones? 31So do┘not└worry, saying, 'What will-we-eat? Or, 'What will-we-drink?' or, 'What will-we-wear?' 32For the Gentiles seek all these-things. For the heavenly [the] Father of-you knows that you-have-need-of these-things. 33But seek first the kingdom [of-[the] God]ms, and all these-things will-be-added to-you. 34Therefore do┘not└worry about [the] tomorrow, for [the] tomorrow will-worry-about itself. Sufficient for-the day (is) the evil of-it.</span>
