---
book: Matthew
chapter: 5
next: chapter-06
prev: chapter-04
title: Matthew 5
translation: WNT
type: chapter
weight: 5
---

## Matthew Chapter 5

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> And having-seen the crowds, he-went-up one the/a mountain; and he having-sat-down, the disciples of-him came-to him. 2And having-opened the mouth of-him, he-began-to-teach them saying, 11"Blessed are-you when they-insult you and persecute (you) and say all evil against youpl [falsely]ms for-the-sake-of me. 12Rejoice and be-glad, because the reward of-you is much in [the] heaven[s]. For thus they-persecuted the prophets [the] before you. 13"You are the salt of-the earth; but if [the] salt loses the/its saltiness, by-what will-it-be-made salty? It-is-strong for nothing yet except2 having-been-thrown outside to-be-trampled by [the] men. 14You are the light of-the world. A city set on (a) hill is┘not└able to-be-hid. 15Neither do-they-light (a) lamp and put it under the/a bucket but on the/a lampstand, and it gives-light to-all the-ones in the house. 16Let┘the light of-you└shine in-such-a-way before [the] men [in-order]-that they-may-see the good works of-you, and they-may-glorify the Father of-you [the] in [the] heaven[s]. 17"Do┘not└think that I-came to-destroy the Law or the prophets. I-did┘not└come to-destroy (them), but to-fulfill (them). 18For truly I-tell you, until2 the sky and the earth pass-away, one-iota or one serif will┘not└pass-away from the Law until2 all things come-to-be. 19So whoever destroys one of-[the] these [the] least commandments and teaches [the] men so, will-be-called least in the kingdom of-[the] heaven[s]. But whoever2 does and teaches (them)—this-one will-be-called great in the kingdom of-[the] heaven[s]. 20For I-say to-you that unless2 the righteousness of-you exceeds more than the scribes and Pharisees, you-will┘not└enter the kingdom of-the heaven[s]. 21"You-heard that it-was-said to-the ancients, 'You-shall┘not└commit-murder,' and whoever commits-murder will-be-liable to-[the] condemnation. 22But I say to-youpl that everyone [the] getting-angry towards-the brother of-him will-be-liable to-[the] condemnation; andwhoever2 says to the brother of-him, 'Raca,' will-be liable to-the Sanhedrin, and whoever2 says, 'Fool,' will-be liable to the Gehenna of-[the] fire. 23So if you-bring the gift of-yousg to the altar and-there remember that the brother of-you has something against you, 24leave there the gift of-you before the altar and go first reconcile to-the brother of-you, and then, having-come, offer the gift of-you. 25Be coming-to-terms-with the opponent of-you quickly while2 you-are with him on the road, lest-at-any-time the/your opponent deliver you to-the judge and the judge (deliver you) to-the officer and he-put (you) in prison. 26Truly I-say to-you, you-will┘not└come-out from-there until2 you-pay the last quadrans. 27"You-heard that it-was said, 'You-shall┘not└commit adultery.' 28But I say to-youpl that everyone [the] looking-at (a) woman unto [the] lusting-after her already committed adultery-with her in-the heart of-him. 29"And if the right [the] eye of-you offends you, pluck┘it└out and throw (it) away-from you, for it-is-better for-you in-order-that one of-the members of-you be-destroyed and not the whole body of-you be-thrown into Gehenna. 30And if the right hand of-you offends you, cut┘it└off and throw (it) away-from you, for it-is-better for-you in-order-that one of-the members of you be-destroyed and not the whole body of-you go-away into Gehenna. 31"And it-was-said, 'Whoever2 divorces the wife of-him, let-him-give her (a) certificate-of-divorce.' 32But I say to-you that everybody [the] divorcing the wife of-him—except of-(the)-matter of-sexual-immorality—treats her to-be-(an) adulteress, and whoever2 marries (a)-divorced-one commits-adultery. 33"Again you-heard that it-was-said to-the ancients, 'Yousg-shall┘not└swear-falsely,' but, 'you-shall-perform to-the Lord the oaths of-you.' 34But I say to-you not to-swear at-all, neither by [the] sky because it-is (the) throne of-[the] God, 35nor by the earth because it-is (the) footstool of-the feet of-him, nor by Jerusalem because it-is (the) city of-the Great King, 36neither shall-you-swearsg by the head of-you, because you-are┘not└able to-make one hair white or black. 37But let┘the word of-youpl└be yes, yes; no, no; but the thing more than-these is of [the] evil/the evil-one. 38"You-heaerd that it-was-said, '(An) eye for (an) eye' and '(a) tooth for (a) tooth.' 39But I say to-you not to-lash-back-at [the] evil, but whoever strikes you on the right cheek [of-you]ms, turn the other to-him also. 40And to-the-one wanting to-sue you and to-take the tunic/shirt of-you, let┘him also└have the/your cloak. 41And whoever forces you (to go) one mile, go with him two. 42Give to-the-one asking you, and do┘not└turn-away-from the-one wanting to-borrow from you. 43"You-heard that it-was-said, 'Love the neighbor of-you,' and hate the enemy of-you. 44But I say to-you, love the enemies of-you, and pray for the-ones persecuting you, 45in-order-that you-may-become sons of-the father of-you [the] in heaven[s], because he-raises-up the sun of-him on evil-ones and good-ones and rains on just-ones and unjust-ones. 46For if you-love the-ones loving you, what reward do-you-have? Do┘not even [the] tax-collectors└do the same-thing? 47And if you greet the brothers of-you only, what are-you-doing more? Do┘not even [the] Gentiles└do the same-thing? 48So be perfect/mature like the heavenly [the] Father of-you is perfect.</span>
