---
book: Matthew
chapter: 7
next: chapter-08
prev: chapter-06
title: Matthew 7
translation: WNT
type: chapter
weight: 7
---

## Matthew Chapter 7

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Do┘not└criticize in-order-that you-may┘not└be-criticized. 2For with what criticism you-criticize you-will-be-criticized, and with what measure you-measure it-will-be-measured to-you. 3And why do┘you└look-at the piece-of-sawdust in the eye of-the brother of-you, and you-do┘not└recognize the log in [the] your eye? 4Or how will-you-say to-the brother of-you, 'Let me-take-out the piece-of-sawdust from the eye of-you,' and behold the/a log (is) in the eye of-you? 5Hypocrite! First take-out the log in the eye of-you, and then you-will-see-clearly to-take-out the piece-of-sawdust from the eye of-the brother of-you. 6"Do┘not└give the holy-thing to-[the] dogs or cast the pearls of-you before [the] pigs, lest-at-any-time they-will-trample them with the feet of-them and, having-turned, they-attach you. 7"Ask and you-will-receive, seek and you-will-find, knock and it-will-be-opened to-you. 8For every one asking receive and the-one seeking finds and to-the-one knocking it-will-be-opened. 9Or, what man of you, whom the son of-him will-ask-for (a) loaf, he-will┘not┘┘└give him (a) stone, └└will-he? 10Or also, (if) he-will-ask-for (a) fish, he-will┘not┘┘└give him (a) snake, └└will-he? 11If then you, being evil, know to-give good gifts to-the children of-you, more by-much the Father of-you [the] in [the] heaven[s] will-give good-things to-the ones asking him. 12So all-things as-many-as-ever2 you-want [in-order]-that [the] men may-do to/for-you, thus you do also to-for them, for this is the Law and the prophets. 13Go-in through the narrow gate, because the gate (is) wide and the way (is) wide leading to [the] destruction, and many are the-ones going-in through it, 14because the gate (is) narrow and the road [the] leading to [the] life (is) restricted, and few are the-ones finding it. 15"Beware of [the] false-prophets, who come to-you in clothing of-sheep, but inwardly they-are savage wolves. 16By the fruits of-them you-will-know them. They-do┘not┘┘└gather grapes from thorns or figs from thistles, └└do-they? 17Thus every good tree bears good fruit[s], and (a) worthless tree bears bad fruit[s]. 18(A) good tree is┘not└able to-bear bad fruit[s], neither (does) (a) worthless tree (bear) good fruit. 19Every tree not bearing good fruit is-cut-down and is-thrown in the fire. 20So by/from the fruits of-them you-will-know them. 21"Not every one saying to-me, 'Lord, Lord,' will-enter into the kingdom of-[the] heaven[s], but the-one doing the will of the Father of-me [the] in [the] heaven[s]. 22Many will-say to-me in that [the] day, 'Lord, Lord, did-we┘not└prophesy in-[the] your name, and in-[the] your name cast-out demons, and in-[the] your name do many miracles?' 23And then I-will-confess to-them [that], 'I┘never└knew you. Go-away from me, [the]-ones working [the] lawlessness.' 24"So everyone who hears [the] these words of-me and does them will-be-likened to-(a)-wise man who built the house of-him on [the] bedrock. 25And [the] rain fell and the/a flood[s] came and the wind[s] blew and best-against [the] that house, and it-did┘not└fall, for it-was-built on [the] bedrock. 26And every one hearing [the] these words of-me and not doing them will-be-likened to-(a)-foolish man who built the house of-him on [the] sand. 27And [the] rain fell and the/a flood[s] came and the wind[s] blew and beat-against [the] that house, and it-fell, and the fall of-it (was) great."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v28"><sup class="verse-num">28</sup> And it-happened when [the] Jesus finished [the] these words, the crowd[s] were-amazed/impressed with the teaching of-him. 29For he-was teaching them like one-having authority and not like the scribes of-them.</span>
