---
book: Exodus
chapter: 21
next: chapter-22
prev: chapter-20
title: Exodus 21
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 21
---

## Exodus Chapter 21

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Present these ordinances to the people. 2"If you buy a Hebrew slave, he'll serve six years and go free on the seventh without pay. 3If he came alone, he'll go out alone. If he has a wife, they'll go out together. 4If his master gives him a wife and she bears him sons or daughters, the wife and her children belong to her master, and the slave will go out alone. 5But if the slave says he loves his master, his wife and children, and won't leave them to be a free man, 6his master is to take him to the judges—to the door or doorpost—and pierce his ear with an awl. Then he'll serve him permanently. 7"If a man sells his daughter as a female slave, she's not to go free as the male slaves do. 8If she's not pleasing to her master who designated her for himself, he is to let her be bought back. He can't sell her to a foreigner; he'd be treating her unfairly. 10If he marries another woman, he can't reduce her food, clothing, or conjugal rights. 11If he won't do these things for her, she'll go out without being paid for. 9If he designates her for his son, he is to treat her like a daughter. 12"Execute anyone that assaults and kills someone. 13If it was an accident, I'll designate a safe place the slayer can flee to. 14But take even from the horns of my altar anyone that does premeditated murder. 16"Executef kidnappers whether they hold in possession or sell the one they kidnapped. 18"If men are fighting and one strikes the other with a stone or his fist and he doesn't die, but is laid up, 19if he gets up and walks around outside with his staff, then don't punishf the one that hit him. He'll pay for the man's loss of time and take care of him till he fully recovers. 20"If a man beats his male or female slave with a rod and the slave dies, punish him. 21If the slave survives a day or so, there's no punishment; he's his property. 22"If men are fighting and hit a pregnant woman and she miscarries without further injury, fine him as her husband requires and the judges determine. 23But if there's further harm, punishf life for life, 24eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, 25burn for burn, wound for wound, bruise for bruise. 26"If a man hits his male or female slave in the eye and puts it out, he'll free the slave for the eye. 27If he knocks out his male or female slave's tooth, he'll free the slave for the tooth. 28"If an ox gores a man or woman to death, stone it, don't eat it, and don't punish the owner. 29But if it has gored before and its owner knew it and didn't pen it up, if it kills somebody, stone the ox and execute the owner. 30If a ransom is demanded from him, he'll give whatever the relatives demand for loss of life. 31If it gores a son or daughter, the same rule applies. 32If it gores a male or female slave, the owner has to give the slave's master 12 oz 30 shekels of silver. Stone the ox. 33"If someone digs a pit without covering it up and an ox or donkey falls in it, 34the pit's owner has to pay the animal's owner for the loss, and the dead animal becomes his. 35"If one man's ox kills another man's ox, sell the live ox, divide the sale price, and divide the dead ox between them. 36If it was previously known to gore and its owner didn't pen it up, the owner will pay ox for ox, and the dead animal will be his.</span>
