---
book: Exodus
chapter: 28
next: chapter-29
prev: chapter-27
title: Exodus 28
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 28
---

## Exodus Chapter 28

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> From the Israelites, have your brother Aaron and his sons Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar come to you to serve as priests. 2Make holy vestments for Aaron, glorious and beautiful. 3Talk to skilled artisans that I've given wisdom for making them and consecrate them for performing service to me. 4Make these vestments for Aaron and his sons: a pouch, ephod, robe, tunic made out of checkered work, a turban, and a sash. 5The artisans are to use gold; blue, purple, and scarlet material; and fine linen. 6"They're to make the ephod out of gold; blue, purple, and scarlet material; and finely twined linen. 7It will have 2 shoulder pieces joined to its 2 ends. 8The skillfully woven band on it will have the same design and material. 9Take 2 onyx stones and engrave the names of Israel's sons on them, 106 per stone in their birth order. 11Like a jeweler engraves a signet, engrave the 2 stones with their names, and set them in delicate gold settings. 12Put the 2 stones on the shoulder pieces of the ephod. Aaron will carry them on his two shoulders as a memorial of the people of Israel. 13Make delicate gold settings 14and 2 pure gold chains. Make them out of twined cordage and put the corded chains on the delicate settings. 15"Make a Pouch of Judgment, an artisan's work. Make its design match the ephod—with blue, purple, scarlet material, and finely twined linen. 16It will be 9ins 1 span square and folded double. 17Mount four rows of gemstones on it: a ruby, topaz, and emerald on the first row; 18a turquoise, sapphire, and diamond on the second; 19a jacinth, agate, and amethyst on the third; 20and a beryl, onyx, and jasper on the fourth—all set in delicate gold decorations. 21Set the precious stones in the birth order of Israel's 12 sons. Engrave their names as on a seal. 22On the pouch put pure gold chains of twined cordage. 23Put 2 gold rings on the 2 ends of the pouch, 24and put the 2 gold cords on the rings. 25Put the other 2 ends of the cords on the 2 decorative settings and attach them to the shoulder pieces at the front of the ephod. 26Make 2 gold rings and put them on the 2 ends of the pouch, on the edge of the inner side of the ephod. 27Make 2 gold rings and put them at the bottom of the 2 shoulder pieces of the ephod, on the front close to where it joins together, above the skillfully woven band. 28Use a blue cord to tie the rings of the pouch to the ephod rings, so it will be on the woven band of the ephod, and the pouch won't come loose from the ephod. 29Aaron will carry the names of Israel's sons in the Pouch of Judgment over his heart when he goes into the Holy Place, for a memorial in front of the LORD continually. 30Put the Urim and Thummim in the pouch. 31"Make the whole ephod robe blue 32with an opening for the head in the middle. Around the opening put an edging made of woven work—as with a coat of mail—so it won't tear. 33-34All around the hem, put pomegranates made out of blue, purple, and scarlet material; and alternate gold bells with them. 35Aaron will wear it when he performs service, and other people can hear it tinkling when he goes in and leaves the Holy Place in case he dies while he's in front of the LORD. 36"Make a pure gold plate and engrave it 'Holy to the LORD'—as on a seal. 37Use a blue cord to fasten it to the front of the turban. 38Aaron will always wear it on his forehead to take away the sin from all holy gifts the Israelites consecrate, to make them acceptable to the LORD. 39Weave the tunic out of checkered work of fine linen and make a turban and sash out of fine linen. 40"For Aaron's sons make tunics, sashes, and caps, bright and beautiful. 41Put them on him and his sons; anoint, ordain, and consecrate them to serve me as priests. 42Make linen pants to cover their bare skin, pants that reach from their waist to their thighs. 43They'll wear them in the Tent of Meeting and when they go to the altar to perform service in the Holy Place so they won't incur guilt and die—a permanent statute for Aaron and his descendants.</span>
