---
book: Exodus
chapter: 26
next: chapter-27
prev: chapter-25
title: Exodus 26
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 26
---

## Exodus Chapter 26

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Make the Tabernacle with 10 curtains of finely twined linen and blue, purple, and scarlet material. Make them with cherubs, a skilled weaver's work. 2All the curtains will be 42 x 6ft. 3Make 2 sets of 5 joined curtains. 4Make blue loops on the edge of the outer curtain in the first set; do the same with the second set. 5Make 50 loops in the one curtain, and 50 loops on the edge of the second set. Put the loops across from each other. 6Make 50 gold clasps and join the curtains together with them so the Tabernacle makes a unit. 7-8"Make 11 curtains out of goats' hair for a covering over the Tabernacle. Make them 45 x 6ft. 9Join 5 curtains in one set, and 6 curtains in another set. Double the sixth curtain at the front of the tent. 10Make 50 loops on the edge of the outside curtain in the two sets. 11Make 50 bronze clasps, put them into the loops, and join the tent together to make one unit. 12The overlapping part that's left over in the curtains of the tent—the half curtain—will lap over the back of the Tabernacle. 13The 18ins on each side of what's left over in the length of the curtain, will lap over the back of the sides of the Tabernacle to cover each side. 14Make a covering for the tent out of rams' and dolphin skins dyed red. 15"Make vertical boards out of acacia wood for the Tabernacle. 16Make them 15ft x 27in. 17With all the boards, make a mortise and tenon on each board, so they fit together. 18Make 20 boards for the south side of the Tabernacle. 19Make 40 silver bases under the 20 boards, 2 bases under each board for its mortise and tenon. 20-21Do the north side of the Tabernacle the same as the south side. 22For the back of the Tabernacle, the west end, make 6 boards. 23For the two back corners make 2 boards. 24They'll double on top of each other; together they'll be complete to the top to the first ring. Make both corners alike. 25There will be 8 boards with their 16 silver bases, 2 bases under each board. 26"Make 5 braces out of acacia wood for the boards on one side of the Tabernacle, 275 braces for the boards on the other side, and 5 braces for the rear, west end. 28The middle brace in the center of the boards will go from one end to the other. 29Overlay the boards with gold and make their gold rings into holders for the braces. Overlay the braces with gold too. 30Build the Tabernacle by the plan I showed you on the mountain." 31"Make a curtain out of blue, purple, and scarlet material and finely twined linen. Put cherubs on it, a skilled weaver's work. 32Hang it on four posts of acacia wood overlaid with gold, having gold hooks, and set on four silver sockets. 33Hang the curtain under the clasps and bring the Ark of Testimony inside the curtain that separates the Holy Place from the Holy of Holies. 34Mount the mercy seat on the Ark. 35Outside the curtain, set the table on the north side of the Tabernacle and the lampstand on the south side. 36For the doorway of the tent, make a screen out of blue, purple, and scarlet material and fine linen, a weaver's work. 37For the screen, make five posts of acacia wood overlaid with gold, having gold hooks, and set on 5 bronze sockets.</span>
