---
book: Leviticus
chapter: 23
next: chapter-24
prev: chapter-22
title: Leviticus 23
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 23
---

## Leviticus Chapter 23

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Yahveh told Moses to tell Israel, "Yahveh has appointed these times: 3six days you can work, but the seventh day is a Sabbath for complete rest, a holy convocation. It's a Sabbath to Yahveh wherever you live. 4"These are his appointed times, holy convocations that you'll declare at their appointed times. 5The fourteenth day, first month at twilight is Yahveh's Passover. 6Then on the fifteenth, there's a Festival of Unleavened Bread to him. Eat bread without yeast for a week. 7The first day, hold a holy convocation; don't work. 8Present an offering by fire to Yahveh for a week. On the seventh day, hold a holy convocation; don't work." 9-10Yahveh told Moses to say to Israel, "When you harvest the land I'm giving you, take a bundle of the first part of the harvest to the priest. 11The day after Sabbath he'll wave it back and forth in front of Yahveh for you to be accepted. 12When you wave it, offer a male lamb a year old without defect for a burnt offering. 13Its grain offering will be .22 bushel .2 ephah of fine flour mixed with olive oil, an offering by fire to Yahveh for a pleasing aroma, with its liquid offering, 3pts ¼ hin of wine. 14Before you take the offering to your God, don't eat bread or roasted grain from the new growth. It's an ongoing permanent statute wherever you live. 15"Count seven Sabbaths from the day after the Sabbath when you brought the bundle for the wave offering. 16Count 50 days to the day after the seventh Sabbath. Then present a new grain offering to Yahveh. 17Take in 2 loaves of bread for a wave offering, made from .22 bushel .2 ephah. They'll consist of fine flour baked with yeast as the first of the harvest to Yahveh.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v18"><sup class="verse-num">18</sup> Along with the bread, present 7 year-old male lambs without defect, a bull from the herd, and 2 rams. They'll be a burnt offering along with their grain offering and liquid offerings. It's an offering by fire of an aroma pleasing to Yahveh. 19Also offer 1 male goat for a sin offering and 2 yearling male lambs for a peace offering. 20The priest will wave them with the bread from the first part of the harvest for a wave offering with 2 lambs in front of Yahveh. They're holy to Yahveh for the priest. 21On that same day, make a proclamation. Hold a holy convocation. Don't work. It's an ongoing permanent statute wherever you live. 22"When you harvest, don't harvest the corners of your field or gather the gleanings from your harvest. Leave them for the poor and foreigners. I'm Yahveh your God." 23-24Yahveh told Moses to tell Israel, "The first day, seventh month, hold a complete rest, a reminder by blowing bugles, a holy convocation. 25Don't work but present an offering by fire to Yahveh."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v26"><sup class="verse-num">26</sup> Yahveh told Moses, 27-28"The tenth day, seventh month, is The Day of Atonement, a holy convocation. Fast and don't work; present an offering by fire to Yahveh to atone for yourselves to Yahveh your God. 29Any of you that won't fast 30and refrain from working that day, I'll destroy from among the people. 31It's a permanent statute wherever you live. 32On the ninth of the month at evening, rest till the next evening." 33-34Again Yahveh told Moses to tell Israel, "The fifteenth day, seventh month is the Festival of Booths to Yahveh for a week. 35The first day is a holy convocation. Don't do any kind of work. 36For a week, present an offering by fire to Yahveh. On the eighth day, hold a holy convocation and present an offering by fire to Yahveh. 37"These are Yahveh's scheduled holidays that you're to declare as holy convocations, to present burnt offerings to Yahveh, grain offerings, sacrifices, and liquid offerings, each day's matter as prescribed. 38They're in addition to the ones on Yahveh's Sabbaths. 39"The fifteenth day, seventh month, when you've gathered your crops, celebrate Yahveh's festival for a week. Rest on the first and eighth days. 40-41On the first day, take the foliage from beautiful trees, palm branches and boughs of leafy trees and willows by the stream. Every year celebrate a festival to Yahveh your God for a week. It's an ongoing permanent statute for the seventh month. 42The native-born in Israel will live in booths for a week 43to remind your generations that I had the Israelites live in booths when I brought them out of Egypt. I'm Yahveh your God."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v44"><sup class="verse-num">44</sup> Moses declared to Israel Yahveh's specified holidays.</span>
