---
book: Leviticus
chapter: 27
prev: chapter-26
title: Leviticus 27
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 27
---

## Leviticus Chapter 27

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Again Yahveh told Moses, "When people make difficult vows, appraise them before Yahveh. 3Appraise a male that's 20 to 60 years old at 20 oz of silver 50 shekels of the sanctuary 4and a female at 12 oz 30 shekels of silver. 5Appraise a male that's 5 to 20 years old at 8 oz 20 shekels and a female at 4 oz 10 shekels. 6Appraise a male that's a month to 5 years old at 2 oz 5 shekels of silver and a female at 1⅕ oz 3 shekels. 7Your appraisal for males above 60 will be 6 oz 15 shekels and 4 oz 10 shekels for females. 8But if you can't afford that appraisal, you can have the priest appraise you according to your means. 9If it's an animal you can offer to Yahveh, it will be holy. 10You won't exchange it good for bad or vice versa. If you do exchange it, both it and the substitute become holy. 11-12But if it's a ceremonially unclean animal, which people don't offer to Yahveh, the priest will appraise it. His appraisal is final. 13But if you ever want to buy it back, add a fifth to the appraisal. 14"If you consecrate your house to Yahveh, the priest will appraise it. His appraisal is final. 15But if you want to buy it back, add a fifth to the appraisal. 16"If you consecrate part of your field to Yahveh, the priest's appraisal will be in proportion to the seed for sowing it: 11 bushels 1 homer of barley at 20 oz 50 shekels of silver. 17If you consecrate your field in relation to the Year of Jubilee, it will stand according to the priest's appraisal. 18If you consecrate your field after the Year of Jubilee, the priest will calculate the price in proportion to the years till the next Year of Jubilee and deduct it from its appraisal. 19If you ever want to buy it back, add a fifth to the appraisal. 20If you sell it, you can't buy it back. 21When it reverts in the Year of Jubilee, it will be holy to Yahveh like a field set apart and will belong to the priest. 22If you consecrate a field to Yahveh that you've bought—not a part of your own property—23then the priest will calculate for it the amount of your valuation as holy to Yahveh. 24In the Year of Jubilee, the field will go back to its original owner. 25Appraisals will be in shekels of the sanctuary (20 gerahs per shekel). 26"However, you can't consecrate firstborn animals—ox or sheep; they already belong to Yahveh. 27But if it's a ceremonially unclean animal, you can buy it back according to its appraised value plus a fifth. If you don't buy it back, the priest will sell it for its appraised value. 28"Nevertheless, nothing devoted to Yahveh—man, animal, or field—can be sold or bought back. It's most holy. 29No one that's been sentenced to death can be ransomed. Execute that person. Laws About Tithes 30"Set apart to Yahveh a tenth of the land, produce of the ground and fruit of the trees. 31If you want to buy back part of that tenth, add a fifth to it. 32Set apart to Yahveh every tenth member of a herd and flock. 33Whether it's good or bad, you don't need to substitute for it. If you do, both it and the substitute become holy, and you can't buy them back."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v34"><sup class="verse-num">34</sup> Those are commandments Yahveh gave Moses for Israel at Mount Sinai.</span>
