---
book: Leviticus
chapter: 13
next: chapter-14
prev: chapter-12
title: Leviticus 13
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 13
---

## Leviticus Chapter 13

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Yahveh told Moses and Aaron, 2"When any of you has a swelling, rash, or skin discoloration that could become leprous, go to Aaron the priest or one of his sons as priests. 3He'll examine the spot. If the hair in the spot has turned white and the infection appears to be deeper than the skin, it's leprosy. The priest will pronounce you unclean. 4But if the discoloration doesn't appear to go that deep and the hair on it hasn't turned white, the priest will quarantine you for a week 5and examine it on the seventh day. If the spot has changed or spread, he'll quarantine you for another week 6and examine it again. If the spot has faded and not spread, he'll pronounce you ceremonially clean; it's just a rash. Wash your clothes and be clean. 7"But if the rash spreads, go to the priest again, 8and he'll pronounce you unclean. It's leprosy. 9"If you get leprosy, you need to go to the priest 10to be examined. If there's a white swelling in the skin that has turned the hair white and there are open sores in the swelling, 11it's chronic leprosy. The priest will pronounce you unclean. He won't quarantine because you're definitely unclean. 12If the leprosy spreads from head to toe, 13he'll pronounce you clean if it has all turned to normal skin color. 14But if open sores appear, 15it's leprosy. 16If the open sores turn to normal skin color again, 17the priest will pronounce you clean. 18"When a boil heals 19and a discoloration or reddish-white swelling comes up in its place, show it to the priest. 20If it appears to be deeper than the skin and the hair on it has turned white, he'll pronounce you unclean. It's leprosy that has broken out in the boil. 21But if there aren't any white hairs in it, it's not deeper than the skin, and it's faded, you'll quarantine for a week. 22If it spreads, the priest will pronounce you unclean; it's an infection. 23But if the discoloration doesn't spread, it's just a scar from the boil. You're clean. 24"If your body gets a burn on the skin and an open sore becomes a bright white or reddish-white spot, 25the priest needs to examine it. If the hair in the bright spot has turned white and appears to be deeper than the skin, it's leprosy that broke out of the burn. He'll pronounce you unclean. 26If there's no white hair in the bright spot and it's no deeper than the skin, but has faded, you'll quarantine for a week. 27The priest will examine you on the seventh day. If it spreads on the skin, he'll declare you unclean; it's leprosy. 28But if the bright spot doesn't spread, but has faded, it's the swelling from the burn. The priest will declare you clean; it's just a scar from the burn. 29"If any of you, man or woman, has an infection on the head—or in the beard, 30the priest needs to examine it. If it appears to be deeper than the skin and there's thin yellowish hair in it, he'll pronounce you unclean. It's a sore, leprosy of the head or beard. 31But if it appears to be no deeper than the skin and there's no black hair in it, quarantine for a week. 32On the seventh day, the priest will examine it. If the sore hasn't spread, no yellowish hair has grown in it, and the scale appears to be no deeper than the skin, 33then shave except for the spot and quarantine for another week. 34On the seventh day, the priest will examine it. If the spot hasn't spread and doesn't appear to be deeper than the skin, he'll pronounce you clean. 35If the spot spreads after that cleansing, 36the priest need not look for yellowish hair; you're definitely unclean. 37If the priest thinks the spot hasn't spread and black hairs have grown in it, the sore has healed. He'll pronounce you ceremonially clean. 38"If any of you, man or woman, has a white bright spot on the skin, 39the priest needs to examine it. If it's faint white, it's eczema breaking out on the skin. You're ceremonially clean. 40"If a man loses his hair and becomes bald; he's clean. 41If his head becomes bald in the front and temples and he's bald on the forehead; he's clean. 42But if a reddish infection occurs on the bald head or brow, it's leprosy breaking out. 43The priest needs to examine him. If the swelling is reddish white, 44he has leprosy. The priest will pronounce him unclean; it's an infection. 45"If you're a leper, you need to tear your clothes, uncover your head, cover your upper lip, and call out, 'Unclean! Unclean!'  46You're unclean as long as you have the infection. Live outside the camp apart from the rest of society.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v47"><sup class="verse-num">47</sup> When a piece of wool or linen cloth or clothes has mildew on it 48as well as on any leather article, 49if the mark is greenish or reddish, show it to the priest. 50He'll examine it and quarantine it for a week. 51Then he'll examine it on the seventh day. If it has spread, it's infectious and unclean. 52Burn it. Lev 13:45-52	53"But if the spot hasn't spread, 54the priest will have them wash it. He'll quarantine it for another week 55and examine it again. If the spot hasn't changed color, it's unclean even though it hasn't spread. Burn it whether the spot is on the front or back. 56"If the priest examines it and the spot has faded after it was washed, he'll remove it from the cloth or leather article. 57If it appears again in the piece of cloth or leather article, it's an outbreak. Burn the article. 58A piece of clothes that loses the spot after it's been washed will be washed a second time and be clean." 59That's the law for pronouncing clean or unclean a spot of mildew on any leather article or piece of wool or linen cloth.</span>
