---
book: Leviticus
chapter: 16
next: chapter-17
prev: chapter-15
title: Leviticus 16
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 16
---

## Leviticus Chapter 16

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> After Aaron's two sons died from approaching Yahveh, he told Moses, 2"Tell your brother Aaron not to enter the Holy Place at just any time—the place inside the curtain in front of the Mercy Seat that's on the Ark. He'll die because I'll appear in the cloud above the mercy seat. 3He'll enter the Holy Place with a bull for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering. 4After he takes a bath, he can put on the linen holy vestments: the tunic, underclothes, sash, and turban. 5He's to take from the community 2 male goats for a sin offering and 1 ram for a burnt offering. 6He'll offer the bull for the sin offering to atone for himself and his family, 7and present the 2 goats at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting. 8He'll cast lots for them, one for Yahveh, the other as a scapegoat. 9Then he'll offer the one as a sin offering to Yahveh 10and present the other one alive to Yahveh to make atonement by sending it into the open country. 11"Aaron will slaughter the bull as a sin offering to atone for himself and his family. 12He'll take a firepan of coals from the altar that's in front of Yahveh and two handfuls of finely ground sweet incense and carry them inside the curtain. 13When he puts the incense on the fire, a cloud of incense will cover the mercy seat so he won't die. 14With his finger, seven times he'll sprinkle the bull's blood in front of the Mercy Seat. 15"Then he'll slaughter the goat as a sin offering for the people and take its blood inside the curtain. He'll do with its blood what he did with the bull's blood. 16He'll atone for the Holy Place because of the Israelites' impurities, transgressions, and sins. He is to do the same thing for the Tent of Meeting that stands with them among their impurities. 17When he makes atonement in the Holy Place, nobody will be in the Tent of Meeting till he comes back out, so he can atone for himself, his family, and the whole assembly. 18Then he'll go out to the altar that's in front of Yahveh and atone for it by putting some of the bull's and goat's blood on the horns of the altar. 19With his finger he'll sprinkle blood on it seven times to cleanse it and consecrate it from the impurities of the Israelites. 20"When he finishes atoning for the Holy Place, the Tent of Meeting, and the altar, he'll offer the live goat. 21He'll put both hands on its head and confess over it the Israelites' iniquities, transgressions, and sins. He'll put them on the goat's head and send it into the open country by a man standing by. 22The goat will carry their sins to a solitary place, and the man will release it. 23"Then Aaron will come into the Tent of Meeting, change out of the linen vestments, and leave them there. 24He'll take a bath in a holy place, put on his own clothes, and come out to offer burnt offerings to atone for himself and the people. 25He'll offer up in smoke the fat from the sin offering on the altar. 26The one that released the scapegoat will wash his clothes and take a bath. Then he can come into camp. 27But take outside the camp the bull and goat for the sin offering—whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the Holy Place. Burn their hides, meat, and refuse. 28The one that burns them will wash his clothes and take a bath before he comes back into camp. 29"This is a permanent statute: the tenth day, seventh month, you and any foreigner living among you will fast and not work. 30That day, the priest will atone for your sins in front of Yahveh. 31It's a fast and solemn rest for you. 32The priest that's anointed and ordained to serve as priest in his father's place will make atonement. He'll put on the holy linen vestments 33and atone for the holy sanctuary, the Tent of Meeting, the altar, the priests, and the whole assembly. 34That's a permanent statute to atone for the Israelites' sins once a year." Moses did what Yahveh said.</span>
