---
book: Leviticus
chapter: 11
next: chapter-12
prev: chapter-10
title: Leviticus 11
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 11
---

## Leviticus Chapter 11

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Again Yahveh told Moses and Aaron to tell the Israelites, "You can eat animals 3that have a split hoof and chew cud. 4-6Don't eat anything that just chews cud or only has a split hoof: a camel or rock-badger or rabbit. 7Don't eat a pig; it has a split hoof but doesn't chew cud. 8Don't eat their meat or touch their carcasses; they're ceremonially unclean. 9"You can eat anything in the water—seas and rivers—that has fins and scales. 10-11Any marine life that doesn't have fins and scales is repulsive to you; detest their carcasses. [12] 13"Detest these birds and don't eat them: eagles, vultures, buzzards, 14kites, falcons of any kind, 15ravens of any kind, 16ostrices, owls, sea gulls, hawks of any kind, 17little owls, cormorants, ibises, 18water hens, pelicans, carrion vultures, 19storks, herons of any kind, hoopoes, or bats. 20"Detest most winged insects that walk on four legs. 21Eat only the ones that have jointed legs and hop on the ground: 22any kind of locust, cricket, or grasshopper. [23] 24"Touching a carcass makes you ceremonially unclean. 25If you pick it up, you have to wash your clothes and be unclean until evening. 26Touching a ceremonially unclean animal—that doesn't chew cud and split hoofs—makes you unclean. 27Any four-footed animal that walks on paws is ceremonially unclean. Touching its carcass makes you unclean. 28If you pick it up, wash your clothes and be unclean till evening. 29"These things that crawl on the ground are ceremonially unclean: moles, mice, big lizards of any kind, 30gechos, crocodiles, lizards, sand lizards of any kind, and chameleons. 31Whoever touches them when they're dead is unclean till evening. 32Anything they fall on when they're dead is also unclean: wooden articles, clothes, skins, sacks, anything you use. Put them in water till evening, and they'll be clean. 33"Any clay container that one of these ceremonially unclean things falls into is ceremonially unclean. Break it. 34Any food in it that water gets on is likewise unclean. Water or any liquid a person might drink in any container becomes unclean. 35Anything that part of their carcass falls on becomes unclean. Smash an oven or stove; they're permanently unclean. 36A spring or cistern that collects water is clean even though the one that has touched their carcasses is unclean. 37If any part of their carcass falls on any seed for sowing, it's clean. 38But, if water gets on that seed, it's ceremonially unclean. 39"If an animal dies that you have for food, touching its carcass makes you ceremonially unclean till evening. 40If you pick it up or eat some of it, wash your clothes and be unclean till evening. 41"Don't eat anything that crawls on the ground: 42anything that crawls on its belly, walks on four legs, or has many feet is detestable. 43Don't make yourselves ceremonially unclean by them. 44Consecrate yourselves and be holy. 45I'm Yahveh that brought you up from Egypt to be your God. Be holy because I'm holy."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v46"><sup class="verse-num">46</sup> That's the law about animals, birds, marine life, or what crawls on the ground 47so you can distinguish ceremonially clean from unclean, edible from not edible.</span>
