---
book: Leviticus
chapter: 4
next: chapter-05
prev: chapter-03
title: Leviticus 4
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 4
---

## Leviticus Chapter 4

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Yahveh told Moses to tell Israel, "If an anointed priest sins unintentionally 3and brings guilt on the people, he needs to offer to Yahveh a bull without defect as a sin offering. 4He is to take it to the entrance to the Tent of Meeting, put his hand on its head, and slaughter it. 5The anointed priest will take some of its blood to the Tent of Meeting, 6dip his finger in it, and sprinkle it seven times in front of Yahveh in front of the sanctuary curtain. 7He'll put some of it on the horns of the altar of fragrant incense, and pour the rest at the base of the altar that's at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting. 8"He'll remove from the bull the fat of the sin offering: the fat around and on the entrails, 9the two kidneys in the loins with their fat, and the lobe of the liver, which he'll remove with the kidneys 10(like it's removed from the herd animal in the sacrifice for peace offerings), and the priest will offer them up in smoke on the altar of burnt offering. 11But everything else—the bull's hide, meat, head, legs, entrails, and refuse—12he'll take to a ceremonially clean place outside the camp where they pour ashes and burn it on wood. 13"If the whole community sins without realizing it, 14when it does become known, the assembly will offer a bull for a sin offering and take it to the Tent of Meeting. 15The elders of the community will put their hands on its head and slaughter it in front of Yahveh. 16The anointed priest will take some of its blood to the Tent of Meeting, 17dip his finger in it, and sprinkle it seven times in front of the curtain. 18He'll put some on the horns of the altar and pour the rest at the base of the altar that's at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting. 19He'll offer up its fat in smoke on the altar, 20and do with the bull what he did with the bull for the sin offering. The priest will atone for the assembly, and they'll be forgiven. 21Then he'll take the bull outside the camp and burn it like he did the first bull. It's a sin offering for the assembly. 22"When a leader unintentionally does something Yahveh forbids 23and then realizes it, he's to bring a male goat without a defect, 24put his hand on its head, and slaughter it where they slaughter the burnt offering to Yahveh; it's a sin offering. 25The priest will take some of its blood with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar for a burnt offering. He'll pour the rest at the base of the altar, 26and offer up its fat in smoke on the altar as with the fat of a peace offering. The priest will atone for him, and he'll be forgiven. 27"If any of the common people sin unintentionally 28and then realize it, they'll bring a female goat without defect. 29They'll put a hand on its head and slaughter it at the place for the burnt offering. 30The priest will take some of its blood with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar for a burnt offering. He'll pour the rest at the base of the altar. 31He'll remove its fat as with a peace offering and offer it up in smoke on the altar for an aroma pleasing to Yahveh. The priest will atone for them, and they'll be forgiven. 32"If they bring a lamb for a sin offering, it's to be a female without defect. 33They'll put their hand on its head and slaughter it where they slaughter the burnt offering. 34The priest will take some of its blood with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and pour the rest at the base of the altar. 35Then he'll remove its fat as with a peace offering and offer it up in smoke on the altar. The priest will atone for them, and they'll be forgiven. Laws About Guilt Offerings</span>
