---
book: Leviticus
chapter: 15
next: chapter-16
prev: chapter-14
title: Leviticus 15
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 15
---

## Leviticus Chapter 15

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Yahveh told Moses and Aaron to say to Israel, "When a man has a discharge from his body, it's ceremonially unclean 3whether it keeps flowing or stops on its own. 4Anything he lies on or sits on is unclean. 5-6If any of you touch his bed or anything he sits on, wash your clothes, take a bath, and be unclean till evening. 7Any of you that touch a person with a discharge will do the same and be unclean till evening. 8If someone with a discharge spits on any of you that are clean, wash your clothes, take a bath, and be unclean till evening. 9Any saddle a person with a discharge rides on is unclean. 10If any of you touch anything what was under him, wash your clothes, take a bath, and be unclean till evening. 11Likewise, if the one with the discharge touches any of you without rinsing his hands, wash your clothes, take a bath, and be unclean till evening. 12Break any clay container he touches and rinse any wooden container in water. 13"To become ceremonially clean, a man with a discharge will count off a week for his cleansing. He'll wash his clothes and take a bath in running water and be clean. 14On the eighth day, he'll take two turtledoves or young pigeons, and give them to the priest at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting. 15The priest will offer one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering. He'll purify him from his discharge before Yahveh. 16"If a man has a discharge of semen, he'll take a bath and be ceremonially unclean till evening. 17He'll wash any piece of clothes or leather that has semen on it, and it'll be unclean till evening. 18If a man has relations with a woman so that there's an emission of semen, they'll both take a bath and be unclean till evening. 19"When a woman has her period, she'll be in her menstrual impurity for a week. If any of you touch her, you'll be ceremonially unclean till evening. 20Anything she lies on or sits on is unclean. [21] 22-23If any of you touch anything she sits on or lies on, wash your clothes, take a bath, and be unclean till evening. 24If a man has relations with her during her period, he'll be unclean for a week, and any bed he lies on will be unclean. 25"If a woman has a discharge of blood many days outside her period or beyond her period, she'll be ceremonially unclean like during her period. 26Any bed she lies on or anything she sits on is unclean like during her period. 27If any of you touch them, you'll be unclean. Wash your clothes, take a bath, and be unclean till evening. 28To become clean from her discharge, she'll count off a week; afterward she'll be clean. 29On the eighth day, she'll take two turtledoves or young pigeons, and take them in to the priest, to the entrance to the Tent of Meeting. 30He'll offer one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering to purify her. 31"That's how you'll keep Israelites separated from their ceremonial uncleanness so they won't die for defiling my Tabernacle."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v32"><sup class="verse-num">32</sup> That law deals with anyone that has a discharge: a man that has an emission of semen, 33a woman during her period, a man that lies with an unclean woman.</span>
