---
book: Deuteronomy
chapter: 1
next: chapter-02
title: Deuteronomy 1
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 1
---

## Deuteronomy Chapter 1

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Moses spoke to Israel in the open country east of the Jordan, in the Arabah across from Suph between Paran and Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth, and Dizahab. 2It takes 11 days to travel from Horeb/Sinai past Mount Seir to Kadesh-barnea. 3The first day, eleventh month, fortieth year, Moses told Israel everything the LORD had told him to give them. 4That was after he'd defeated Sihon, king of the Amorites, in Heshbon and Og, king of Bashan, in Ashtaroth and Edrei. 5East of the Jordan in Moab, Moses undertook to explain the Law. 6"The LORD our God told us at Horeb/Sinai, 'You've stayed long enough at this mountain. 7Go to the Amorites and their neighbors in the Arabah, the hill country, the western foothills, the Negev, the seacoast, the land of the Canaanites, and Lebanon as far as the Euphrates River. 8I've put the land in front of you. Go in and take over what I swore to give to your ancestors Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and their descendants.' 9"At that time, I told you, 'I can't handle the responsibility for you by myself. 10The LORD has multiplied you, and there are as many of you as stars in the sky. 11May he multiply you a thousand times and bless you like he promised, 12but I can't handle the responsibility for you and your conflict by myself. 13Choose wise, insightful, experienced men from your tribes, and I'll appoint them as your leaders.' 14You answered, 'That's good.' 15I took those wise, insightful men, and appointed them over thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens. 16"I instructed your judges, 'Hear cases between citizens. Judge justly between them or the foreigners among them. 17Don't show favoritism; hear least and greatest the same way. Don't be afraid of people; it's God's judgment. Any case that's too hard, bring to me. 18I've told you everything to do.' 19"Then we left Horeb/Sinai and went through that terrible desert you saw on our way to the hill country of the Amorites. We came to Kadesh-barnea. 20I told you, 'You've come to the hill country of the Amorites that the LORD is about to give us. 21Look, he has put the land in front of you. Take it over like he told you. Don't be afraid or intimidated.' 22Then you came and said to me, 'Let's send scouts ahead to look over the land, and report how to proceed against the towns we'll enter.' 23I liked that idea and took a man from each tribe. 24They went to the hill country and the Valley of Eschol and spied it out. 25They brought some fruit down to us and reported, 'The land the LORD our God is about to give us is a good land.' 26"But you wouldn't go up. You rebelled against the LORD. 27You complained in your tents, 'The LORD hates us. He brought us out of Egypt to deliver us to the Amorites. 28Where can we go up? Our relatives made our hearts melt when they said the people are bigger and taller than we are. The towns are large and fortified to the sky. They saw Anakim there.' 29I told you, 'Don't be afraid of them. 30The LORD your God will go ahead of you and fight for you like you saw him do in Egypt. 31In the desert you saw how he carried you all the way here like a man carries his son.' 32Despite that, you wouldn't trust the One 33that goes ahead of you to find a place to camp and show you how to get there, the One that goes by fire at night and cloud by day. 34"What the LORD heard you say made him angry. He swore, 35'None of you sinful people from this generation will see the good land I swore to give your ancestors. 36Only Caleb son of Jephunneh will see it. I'll give him and his descendants the land he set foot on, because he's followed me faithfully.' 37The LORD was angry with me, too, as a lesson to you, 'You won't go in either. 38Your assistant, Joshua son of Nun, will go in. Encourage him; he'll make Israel able to inherit the land. 39What's more, yourpl little ones that you said would become prey, your offspring that don't know good from bad, will go in. I'll give it to them; they'll take it over. 40You turn around and head out for the desert by the Red Sea.' 41"Then you said, 'We've sinned against the LORD. We'll go up and fight like he commanded.' Every man put on his weapons and thought it would be easy to go up to the hill country. 42"The LORD said to tell them, 'Don't go up to fight. I'm not with you; they'll defeat you.' 43But you ignored him. You acted on your own to go up to the hill country. 44The Amorites came out like bees and chased you and crushed you from Seir to Hormah. 45You came back and cried in the LORD's presence, but he ignored you. 46So you stayed at Kadesh a long time.</span>
