---
book: Deuteronomy
chapter: 2
next: chapter-03
prev: chapter-01
title: Deuteronomy 2
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 2
---

## Deuteronomy Chapter 2

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> We turned around and set out for the desert toward the Red Sea like the LORD instructed me, and we circled Mount Seir for a long time. 2He told me, 3'You've circled this mountain long enough; turn north. 4Tell the people, "Go through the territory of your relatives, Esau's descendants, who live in Seir. 5Don't stir them up; I won't give you a foot of their land. I've given Mount Seir to Esau. 6Buy food and water from them so you can eat and drink. 7The LORD has blessed you in everything you've done. He has known your wanderings through this big desert. He's been with you 40 years. You haven't lacked anything."' 8"So we went past Esau's descendants in Seir, away from the Arabah Road, away from Elath and Ezion-geber. We turned and passed through the Wilderness of Moab. 9The LORD told me, 'Don't harass Moab or stir them up to war, because I won't give you any of their land. I've given Ar to Lot's descendants. [10The Emim lived there before, a people as big, numerous, and tall as the Anakim. 11Like the Anakim they're considered Rephaim, but the Moabites call them Emim. 12The Horites had previously lived in Seir, but Esau's descendants destroyed them and replaced them, like Israel did to the land the LORD gave them.] 13Cross Wadi Zered.' 14It took 38 years to get from Kadesh-barnea across Wadi Zered. That whole generation of soldiers died—like the LORD swore. 15Besides, he opposed them, destroying them from inside the camp. 16"When those soldiers had perished, 17the LORD told me, 18'Cross over Ar, the border of Moab today. 19When you get across from Ammon, don't harass them; I won't give you any Ammonite land. I've given it to Lot's descendants. [20It's regarded as the land of Rephaim as well because they lived in it before. The Ammonites call them Zamzummin, 21a people as big, numerous, and tall as the Anakim, but the LORD destroyed them in front of the Ammonites. They drove them out and replaced them, 22like he did for Esau's descendants in Seir. He destroyed the Horites. They drove them out and have settled in their place till now. 23The Philistines came from Crete and destroyed the Avvim that lived in villages as far as Gaza and lived in their place.]</span>

<span class="verse" id="v24"><sup class="verse-num">24</sup> Pass through Wadi Arnon. I've given you Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land. Start taking it over and confront him in battle. 25Today I'm beginning to put the fear of you on nations all around so when they hear about you, they'll tremble with dread.' 26"I sent ambassadors from the Wilderness of Kedemoth to Sihon with offers of peace, 27'Let me go through your land. I'll stay on the highway. 28Sell me food and water. Just let me go through on foot—29like the descendants of Esau and the Moabites did—till I cross the Jordan to the land the LORD is giving us.' 30Sihon wouldn't let us. The LORD had hardened his spirit and made him stubborn to deliver him to you. 31He told me, 'I've started to deliver Sihon and his land to you. Start occupying it.' 32"Sihon and his people came out to fight us at Jahaz. 33The LORD delivered him, his sons, and his people to us. 34We captured his towns, and completely wiped out their men, women, and children. 35We just took the animals as spoil. 36From Aroer on the edge of Arnon valley and from the city that's in the valley, all the way to Gilead no city was too strong for us. The LORD delivered them to us. 37You didn't go near the land of the Ammonites—along Wadi Jabbok and the towns in the hill country—or wherever else the LORD prohibited.</span>
