---
book: Deuteronomy
chapter: 22
next: chapter-23
prev: chapter-21
title: Deuteronomy 22
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 22
---

## Deuteronomy Chapter 22

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Don't watch your fellow citizen's ox or sheep stray off and not take it to its owner. 2If the owner doesn't live close by or you don't know who the owner is, take it home till the owner comes looking for it and then return it. 3Do the same thing with someone's donkey, piece of clothing, or anything a person lost. You can't confiscate it. 4Don't watch your fellow citizen's donkey or ox fall down on the road and not help it get it up. 5"A woman is not to wear a man's clothes or vice versa. Whoever does that is detestable to the LORD. 6"If you find a bird's nest in a tree or on the ground with a mother sitting on eggs or chicks, 7you can take the young, but let the mother go so you'll prosper and have a long life. 8"When you build a house, build a short wall around the flat roof so you won't be responsible for somebody falling off and dying. 9"Don't sow in your vineyard a second kind of crop interspersed and thereby make both crops unusable. 10Don't plow with an ox and donkey together. 11Don't wear clothing made from wool and linen mixed.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v13"><sup class="verse-num">13</sup> If a man takes a wife and goes into her and then turns against her, 14accuses her of shameful acts, publicly defames her, and says, 'I took this woman, but when I came near her, I found out she wasn't a virgin,' 15then her parents will bring the evidence for her virginity to the elders at the city gate. 16Her father will tell them, 'I gave her to him as a wife, but he turned against her 17He accused her Hjjjjand accused her of not being a virgin. But this is the evidence of her virginity.' They'll spread the article of clothing in front of the elders of the city. 18They'll take the man and punish him. 19They'll fine him 2½ lbs 100 shekels of silver and give it to the girl's father, because the husband publicly defamed a virgin of Israel. She'll remain his wife, and he can't divorce her. 20But if the accusation is true, 21they'll take her out to the entrance to her father's home. The men in her city will stone her to death because she committed a disgraceful act by serving as a prostitute in her father's family. That's how you're to purge evil from among you. 22"If a man is caught lying with a married woman, both will die. That's how you're to purge evil from Israel. 23"If a virgin is engaged and another man lies with her, 24take them both to the city gate and stone them to death—the girl, because she didn't scream in the city, and the man because he violated another man's fiancée. That's how you're to purge evil from Israel. 25But if the man finds an engaged girl in a field and rapes her, then only the man will die. 26Don't do anything to her; there's no sin in her that deserves death. This case is like a man that murders someone. 27When he found her in the field, she screamed, but there wasn't anybody there to rescue her. 28"If a man finds a virgin that's not engaged and has sex with her and they're discovered, 29the man will give her father 20 oz 50 shekels of silver. She'll become his wife because he violated her. He can't divorce her. 30"A man can't marry his father's former wife and thereby uncover his father's cloak.</span>
