---
book: Deuteronomy
chapter: 5
next: chapter-06
prev: chapter-04
title: Deuteronomy 5
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 5
---

## Deuteronomy Chapter 5

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Then Moses called Israel together, "Listen to these statutes and ordinances so you can learn them and observe them carefully. 2The LORD our God made a covenant with us at Horeb/Sinai. 3He didn't make that covenant with our ancestors, but with us. 4Out of the fire he spoke to you directly at the mountain 5while I stood between him and you. I stood there to tell you what he said, because you were afraid of the fire and didn't go up the mountain. He said, 8'Do not makef a carved image, any likeness of what is in the sky, on the ground, or in the water lower than the ground 9to worshipf or servef, because I am an exclusive God. I visit the consequences of parents' sins on their descendants for three or four generations that hate me. 10I am kind to thousands who love me and obey me. 11'Do not usef my name 'the LORD' your God as a byword. I will punish whoever does that. 12'Observe the Sabbath. Set it apart like I've commanded. 13Workf six days, 14but the seventh day rest to me your God. Do not workf that day—you, your son or daughter, male or female servant, ox, donkey, cattle, foreigner among you. 15Rememberf that you were slaves in Egypt, and I brought you out with a strong hand and outstretched arm. That is why I have commanded you to observe the Sabbath. 16'Honor your parents so you can live a long time and things will go well for you in the land I your God am giving you. 21'Do not covetf someone else's wife, his house, field, male servant, ox, donkey, or anything else.' 22"With a loud voice the LORD said that to your whole assembly at the mountain out of the fire, cloud, and dense darkness. He didn't add anything else. He wrote it on two stone tablets and gave them to me. 23You heard him speak out of the blackness while the mountain was burning. The leaders and elders in your tribes came to me, 24'The LORD our God has shown us how great and glorious he is. We've heard him speak out of the fire. We've seen him speak to people, but they still live. 25But why should we die? This great fire will burn us up. If we hear him speak anymore, it'll kill us. 26Who ever heard the living God speak out of fire like we have, and lived? 27You approach him and hear what he says. Then tell us, and we'll do it.' 28"The LORD told me, 'I've heard what they said. They've done well in saying it. 29Oh that they had a heart to respect me and keep my commandments so it would be well with them and their descendants forever! 30Tell them to go back home. 31But you stand here with me so I can tell you the commandments, statutes, and case laws you're to teach them.' 32Do exactly what he says. Don't stray away from it. 33That way you'll live, things will go well for you, and you'll occupy the land a long time.</span>
