---
book: Leviticus
chapter: 7
next: chapter-08
prev: chapter-06
title: Leviticus 7
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 7
---

## Leviticus Chapter 7

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> This is the law for the guilt offering; it's most holy. 2They're to kill the guilt offering where they kill the burnt offering. The priest will sprinkle its blood around on the altar. 3Then he'll offer its fat: the fat tail, the fat that covers the entrails, 4the two kidneys in the loins with the fat that's on them, and the lobe on the liver. 5The priest will offer them up in smoke on the altar as an offering by fire to the LORD. 6Any male among the priests can eat it in a holy place. 7The same law applies to the guilt offering and sin offering. The priest that makes atonement with it will have it. 8The priest that presents anybody's burnt offering also gets its skin. 9Every grain offering that's baked in an oven or prepared in a pan or on a griddle is for the priest that presents it. 10Every grain offering, dry or mixed with olive oil, will be for any of Aaron's descendants. 11"This is the law for a peace offering. 12If you offer it as a thanksgiving, then along with it, offer cakes without yeast mixed with olive oil, wafers without yeast anointed with olive oil, and cakes of stirred fine flour mixed with olive oil. 13Present your offering with cakes of bread without yeast. 14Present one of each offering as a contribution to the LORD. It belongs to the priest that sprinkles the blood from the peace offerings. 15"Eat the meat from a thanksgiving peace offering the day it's offered. Don't leave any of it till morning. 16If it's an offering for fulfilling a vow or a freewill offering, eat it that day or the next. 17Burn any meat that's left over till the third day. 18If you eat meat from it on the third day, you will not be accepted. It's an offense that makes you guilty. 19"Don't eat meat that touches anything ceremonially unclean; burn it. Otherwise, anybody that is clean can eat it. 20But an unclean person that eats the meat from a peace offering will be excluded from the community. 21Anybody that touches something unclean—human, animal, or something detestable—and then eats the meat from a peace offering, will be excluded from the community." "Don't eat the fat from an ox, sheep, or goat 24or from an animal that dies or wild animals tear apart. Put it to other uses. 25Whoever eats the fat of an animal offered by fire to the LORD will be excluded from the community. 26Don't eat the blood of any bird or animal at home. 27Whoever does, will be excluded from the community." "When you offer a peace offering, take it to the LORD 30with the breast and fat of the animal so you can present it with your hands as a wave offering to the LORD. 31The priest will offer up the fat in smoke on the altar, but the breast will be for Aaron and his sons. 32Give the right thigh to the priest as a contribution from the peace offering. 33That portion is for the one that offers its blood and fat. 34I've taken the breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the contribution from the people's peace offerings, and given them to Aaron the priest and his sons as their permanent due from the people. 35"That's what God has consecrated to Aaron and his sons from the offerings by fire to the LORD when he presents them to serve as priests. 36The LORD commanded the Israelites to give them from the day he anointed them. It's their permanent due."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v37"><sup class="verse-num">37</sup> That's the law for the burnt offering, grain offering, sin offering, guilt offering, ordination offering, and peace offering. 38It's what the LORD commanded Moses at Mount Sinai when he told the Israelites to present their offerings to the LORD in the Wilderness of Sinai.</span>
