---
book: Leviticus
chapter: 20
next: chapter-21
prev: chapter-19
title: Leviticus 20
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 20
---

## Leviticus Chapter 20

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> The LORD told Moses to say to Israel, "Stone to death people that sacrifice their offspring to Molech. 3I'll oppose them and exclude them from the community; they've defiled my sanctuary and my holy name. 4If you don't execute them, 5I'll oppose them and their families, and exclude both them and the ones that carried on prostitution with them. 6"I'll oppose people that turn to mediums or spiritualists and carry on prostitution with them. I'll exclude them from the community. 7-8So consecrate yourselves and be holy. Practice my statutes because I'm the LORD that sanctifies you. 9"Exclude from the community anyone that cusses at father or mother. That's a crime punishable by death. 10"If a man commits adultery with another man's wife, execute them both. 11A man that lies with his father's wife, has uncovered his father's nakedness. Execute them both. They've committed a crime punishable by death. 12If a man lies with his daughter-in-law, execute them both; they've committed incest. They've committed a crime punishable by death. 13A man that lies with a male like the ones that lie with a woman—both of them have committed a disgusting act. Execute them. They've committed a crime punishable by death. 14It's immoral for a man to marry a woman and her mother. Burn them both so there won't be immorality among you. 15Execute a man that lies with an animal and kill the animal. 16Execute any woman that approaches an animal to mate with it; kill the animal. They've committed a crime punishable by death. 17"It's a disgrace for a man to take his sister—his father's or mother's daughter—so he sees her nakedness and she sees his. Exclude them from the community. He has uncovered his sister's nakedness. He bears his guilt. 18A man that lies with a menstruating woman has laid bare her flow, and she has exposed the flow of her blood. Cut both of them off from the community. 19Don't have sexual relations with your aunt; you've made naked a blood relative. You'll be guilty. 20A man that lies with his uncle's wife has uncovered his uncle's nakedness. They'll bear their sin and die childless. 21A man that takes his brother's wife is repulsive; he has uncovered his brother's nakedness. Both will die childless. 22"Keep my statutes and ordinances so the land where I'm taking you won't spew you out. 23Don't follow the customs of nations I drive out ahead of you. It's because they did those things that they're repulsive to me. 24Take their land; I'll give it to you, a land flowing with milk and honey. 25So distinguish between ceremonially clean and unclean animals or birds. Don't make yourselves disgusting by animals, birds, or what crawls on the ground that I've separated from you as unclean. 26Be holy to me because I, the LORD, am holy. I've set you apart from the nations to be mine. 27"Stone a medium or spiritualist, man or woman. They've committed a crime punishable by death."</span>
