---
book: Leviticus
chapter: 26
next: chapter-27
prev: chapter-25
title: Leviticus 26
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 26
---

## Leviticus Chapter 26

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Don't make idols, set up images or sacred pillars, or put stone figurines in your country to bow to. 2Keep my Sabbaths and reverence my sanctuary. 3If you follow my statutes and keep my commandments, 4I'll give you rain in its season so the ground will grow crops and the trees will bear fruit. 5Threshing time will last till grape harvest, and grape harvest will last till planting season. You'll have plenty to eat, and you'll live securely in your country. 6I'll grant peace so you can lie down without feeling afraid. I'll eliminate dangerous wild animals from the land, and no sword will pass through your land. 7You'll chase your enemies, and they'll fall by your sword. 8Five of you will chase 100, and 100 will chase 10,000. 9I'll favor you, multiply you, and confirm my covenant with you. 10You'll eat the old supply and clear out the old because of the new. 11I'll live among you 12and be your God, and you'll be my people. 13I'm the LORD your God that brought you out of Egypt so you wouldn't be their slaves. I broke the bars of your yoke and made you walk erect. 14"If you don't carry out these commandments, 15if you reject my statutes, abhor my ordinances, and break my covenant, 16I'll bring panic over you. Consumption and fever will make your eyes sink in and depress you. You'll plant your seed for nothing because your enemies will eat it. 17I'll oppose you, and your enemies will strike you down. The ones that hate you will rule you. You'll run when nobody's chasing. 18"If you still don't obey me, I'll punish you seven times over 19and break your strong pride. I'll make your sky like iron and your ground like bronze. 20You'll spend your strength for nothing, because the ground won't grow crops and the trees won't bear fruit. 21"If you're still hostile toward me and refuse to obey, I'll strike you with plague seven times over. 22I'll let wild animals loose among you to terrorize your children, destroy your livestock, and decimate your population till your roads are deserted. 23"If you're still hostile toward me and don't return to me, 24I'll be hostile toward you and strike you seven times over. 25I'll bring on you a sword to avenge the covenant. When you retreat to your towns, I'll send a plague and deliver you to your enemies. 26When I break your staff of bread, ten women will bake your bread in one oven and bring it to you in rations. You'll eat and not be satisfied. 27"If you still don't obey me, but act hostile toward me, 28I'll act hostile toward you and punish you seven times over. 29You'll eat your sons and daughters. 30I'll destroy your high places, cut down your incense altars, and heap your remains on the remains of your idols because I'll abhor you. 31I'll lay waste your towns too, and make your sanctuaries desolate. I won't smell your pleasing aromas. 32I'll make the land so desolate it will appall your enemies that settle in it. 33I'll scatter you among the nations and draw out a sword after you as your land grows desolate and your towns become ruins. 34"The land will enjoy its Sabbaths during its desolation while you're in your enemies' country. 35It will get the rest it didn't get on the Sabbaths while you were living in it. 36You that are left, I'll make lose heart in your enemies' countries. The sound of a blown leaf will chase you. You'll run when nobody's chasing you. 37You'll stumble over each other and fall like you're running from the sword, even though nobody's chasing you. You won't have the strength to stand up to your enemies. 38You'll perish among the nations that consume you. 39You that are left will rot away in your enemies' countries because of your ancestors' sin. 40"If you confess your and your ancestors' sin in your unfaithfulness and hostility toward me—41if your uncircumcised heart becomes humble and you make amends for your sin, 42I'll remember my covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob as well, and I'll remember the land. [43] 44I won't reject you so completely that I destroy you and break my covenant with you. 45I'll remember the covenant with your ancestors that I brought out of Egypt in front of the nations so I could be your God. I'm the LORD."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v46"><sup class="verse-num">46</sup> The LORD established those statutes, ordinances, and laws for Israel through Moses at Mount Sinai.</span>
