---
book: 1 Corinthians
chapter: 9
next: chapter-10
prev: chapter-08
title: 1 Corinthians 9
translation: WNT
type: chapter
weight: 9
---

## 1 Corinthians Chapter 9

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Am-I not free? Am-I not (an) apostle? Have-I┘not└seen Jesus the Lord of-us? Are you not the work of-me in (the) Lord? 2If I-am not (an) apostle to-others, [but] I-am to-you. For you are the seal of-the apostleship of-me in (the) Lord. 3[The] my defense to-the-ones sitting-in-judgment-on me is this. 4I-do┘not not┘┘└have (a) right to-eat and drink, do-I? 5I-do┘not not┘┘└have (a) right to-lead-around (a) sister as-(a)-wife, └└ do-I, like the also other apostles and the brothers of—the Lord and Cephas? 6Or do┘I only and Barnabas not└have (a) right not to-work? 7Who at-any-time serves-as-(a)-soldier at┘his-own└expense? Who plants (a) vineyard and does┘not└eat the fruit of-it? Or who shepherds sheep and does┘not└eat [of] the milk of-the flock? 8I-am┘not┘┘└speaking according-to man, └└am-I, or does┘the Law not also└say these-things? 9For in [the] Law of-Moses it-has-been-written, "You-shall┘not└muzzle (an) ox while-threshing." It-is┘not┘┘└(a) concern to-[the] God of-[the] oxen, └└is-it? 10Or does-he-speak altogether on-account-of us? For on-account-of us he-wrote that the-one plowing ought to-plow in hope and the-one threshing (ought) to-thresh in hop of-[the]-sharing. 11If we sowed to-you [the] spiritual-things, (it is a) great-thing if we harvest [the] physical-things of-you? 12If others are-sharers-of the right from-you, not more we? But we-did┘not└use this [the] right. But we-put-up with all-things in-order-that we-might┘not└give any hindrance to-the gospel of-[the] Christ. 13Do-you┘not└know that the-ones performing the sacred (services) [the]ms eat of-the temple; the-ones waiting-on the altar have-(a)-share-with the altar? 14Thus also the Lord gave-directions to-the-ones proclaiming the gospel to-live from the gospel. 15But I have┘not└used any of-these. And I-did┘not└write these-things in-order-that it-may-be thus in my (case). For to-die (would be) good to-me rather than anybody should empty the boast of-me. 16For if I-preach-the-gospel, (a) boast is not to-me; for necessity lies-on me—for woe is to-me if I-do┘not└preach-the-gospel. 17For if I-do this willingly, I-have┘(a) stewardship└entrusted (to me). 18What then is the reward of-me? That preaching-the-gospel I-present the gospel without-charge to the not making-full-use-of the right of-me in the gospel.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v19"><sup class="verse-num">19</sup> For being free from all (men), I-enslave myself to-all (men) in-order–that I-might-gain the more (people); 20and I-became like (a) Jew to-[the] Jews in-order-that I-might-gain Jews. To-the ones under law as under law—not myself being under law—in-order-that I-might-gain the-ones under law. 21To-the-ones without-law (I became) like (a) person-without law—not being without-(the)-law of-God, but under-(the)-law of-Christ—in-order-that I-might gain the-ones without-law. 22To the weak I-became weak in-order-that I-might-gain the weak. I-have-become all-things to-[the] all (men) in-order-that by-all-means I-might-save some. 23And I-do all-things on-account-of the gospel in-order-that I-might-become (a) fellow-partaker of-it.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v24"><sup class="verse-num">24</sup> Do-you┘not└know that the-ones running in (a) race all run, but one receives the prize? So run in-order-that you-may-receive (it). 25And everybody [the] competing-in-the-games exercises-self-control with-respect-to-all-things. Those then (do it) in-order-that they-might-receive (a) perishable crown, but we (do it) to receive (an) imperishable (one). 26I run then in-such-(a)-way as not aimlessly, thus I-box as not beating (the) air. 27But I-keep┘the body of-me└under-control and make┘it└my-servant, lest somehow, having-preached to-others, I┘myself└might-be disqualified.</span>
