---
book: Numbers
chapter: 28
next: chapter-29
prev: chapter-27
title: Numbers 28
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 28
---

## Numbers Chapter 28

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Yahveh told Moses to tell Israel, "Present my offerings by fire at their scheduled times, an aroma pleasing to me, my 'food.' 3Make this offering by fire to Yahveh every day: 2 male lambs a year old without defect. 4Offer one in the morning, the other in the evening. 5For a grain offering, offer .11 bushel .1 ephah of fine flour mixed with 3 pints ¼ hin of pressed olive oil. 6It's a daily burnt offering that was ordained at Mount Sinai. 7The liquid offering that goes with it will be 3 pints ¼ hin of alcohol for each lamb, poured out in the Holy Place. 8Offer the other lamb that evening the same way with its grain offering and liquid offering. Sabbath Offerings 9"On the Sabbath, offer two male lambs a year old without defect, and a fifth of a measure of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering with its liquid offering. 10The burnt offering on each Sabbath is in addition to the daily burnt offering and its liquid offering. Monthly Offerings 11"At the beginning of each month, present a burnt offering to Yahveh: 2 bulls and 1 ram, 12as well as .3 measure of fine flour for a grain offering mixed with olive oil for each bull, 13and .1 of a measure of fine flour mixed with olive oil for each lamb, an aroma pleasing to Yahveh. 14Their liquid offerings will be 3 quarts ½ hin of wine for a bull, 2 quarts ⅓ hin for a ram, and 3 pints ¼ hin for a lamb. 15Offer one male goat for a sin offering with its liquid offering in addition to the daily burnt offering. Passover Offerings 16"The fourteenth day, first month is Yahveh's Passover. 17On the fifteenth the festival will begin. For a week, eat bread with no yeast. 18On the first day is a holy convocation; don't work. 19Present a burnt offering to Yahveh: 2 bulls, 1 ram, and 7 male lambs a year old without defect. 20For their grain offering, present fine flour mixed with olive oil—.3 of a measure for a bull, .2 for the ram, 21and .1 for each lamb. 22Offer 1 male goat for a sin offering, to atone for yourselves. 23Present them besides the morning's daily burnt offering. 24Daily for 7 days, present the food of the offering by fire, an aroma pleasing to Yahveh. Present it with its liquid offering in addition to the daily burnt offering. 25The seventh day, hold a holy convocation; don't work. Feast of Weeks Offerings 26"At the time of the first of the harvest, when you present a new grain offering in your Festival of Weeks, hold a holy convocation; don't work. 27Offer a burnt offering for an aroma pleasing to Yahveh: 2 young bulls, 1 ram, 7 male lambs a year old, 28and their grain offering of fine flour mixed with olive oil—.3 of a measure for each bull, .2 for the ram, 29and .1 for each lamb. 30Offer 1 male goat to atone for yourselves. 31Besides the daily burnt offering and its grain offering, present them with their liquid offerings. They'll be without defect. Feast of Trumpets Offerings</span>
