---
book: Romans
chapter: 2
next: chapter-03
prev: chapter-01
title: Romans 2
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 2
---

## Romans Chapter 2

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> So yousg that condemn don't have any excuse. When you condemn someone else, you condemn yourself, because you're doing the same things. 2You know it's right for God to condemn people that do things like that. 3Do you suppose—condemner of another while doing the same things yourself—that you are going to escape his condemnation? 4Do you disregard his rich kindness, tolerance, and patience, and not understand that his kindness is for leading you to repentance? 5Because of your stubborn, unrepentant heart, you're storing up displeasure for yourself when God reveals his just condemnation. 6He'll pay back every person for what they've done. 7That will mean eternal life for people who strive for glory, honor, and immortality by carrying through in good works. 8It'll mean displeasure and anger for people that chase after injustice. 9There'll be trouble and distress for everybody that does evil, for Jews first and for Greeks. 10But there'll be honor and peace for everybody that does good, for Jews first and for Greeks. 11God doesn't play favorites: 12as many as have sinned without having the Law will perish without having it; as many as have sinned under it will be condemned by it. 13It's not who hears the Law that's good, as far as God's concerned; it's who does the Law. 14When Gentiles that don't have the Law, naturally do what's in it, they are governing themselves. 15They show that the Law is written on their hearts. Their conscience testifies, and their thoughts defend or accuse one another. 16That's the basis for judgment when God by Christ Jesus judges people's secrets by the good news I'm presenting.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v17"><sup class="verse-num">17</sup> But if you wear the name Jew, rely on the Law, take pride in God—18if you know his will, approve of superior things because of what the Law teaches you—19if you're confident that you're a guide to the blind, a light to people in the dark, 20a corrector of the foolish, a teacher of the ignorant because you have the knowledge and truth that's in the Law—21then do you teach others, but not learn yourself? You that preach against stealing, do you steal? 22You that say people shouldn't commit adultery, do you commit adultery? You that detest idols, do you steal from temples? 23You that take pride in the Law, do you dishonor God by breaking it? 24"Gentiles blaspheme God because of you" [Is 52:5], like the scripture says. 25Circumcision benefits you if you practice the Law. If you transgress it, your circumcision amounts to uncircumcision. 26If then the uncircumcised keep the Law's standards, won't their uncircumcision be considered circumcision? 27If the naturally uncircumcised keep the Law, won't they condemn literal-and-circumcised transgressors of the Law? 28It's not the Jew outwardly that's a Jew, and it's not outward circumcision that's circumcision. 29It's the Jew inwardly that's a Jew, and it's the circumcision of the heart—spirit, not letter—that's circumcision. Their praise doesn't come from people, but from God.</span>
