---
book: Jeremiah
chapter: 44
next: chapter-45
prev: chapter-43
title: Jeremiah 44
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 44
---

## Jeremiah Chapter 44

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> A Message to Jeremiah for the Jews Living in Egypt 2"Yahveh of Hosts, the God of Israel, says, 'You've seen the catastrophe I brought on Jerusalem and the towns in Judah; they're in ruins. Nobody's living in them 3because their sinfulness made me angry.  They kept serving and burning sacrifices to gods they and their ancestors hadn't known. 4Yet I sent them my prophets time and again, saying not to do that detestable thing. 5'But they didn't listen, turn from their sin, or quit burning sacrifices to other gods. 6So my anger boiled over and burned in the towns of Judah and the streets of Jerusalem.' 7Now Yahveh says, 'Why harm yourselves and slay man and woman, child and infant, from Judah and leave yourselves without even a remnant? 8You've made me angry with the things you've made with your hands and the sacrifices you've burned to other gods in Egypt. You'll be destroyed and become a curse and disgrace among the nations. 9Have you forgotten your ancestors' sinfulness, the sinfulness of Judah's kings and their wives, the sinfulness you and your wives committed in Judah and the streets of Jerusalem? 10You haven't humbled yourselves or respected me to this day or followed the Law and statutes I set before you and your ancestors.' 11"So Yahveh of Hosts says, 'I'll destroy everybody that's from Judah 12and remove the remnant that's determined to go live in Egypt. From least to greatest will meet their end here by sword or famine. They'll become a curse, something abhorred, a disgrace. 13Like I've punished Jerusalem, I'll punish Egypt with sword, famine, and disease. 14Only a few refugees will ever make it back to the land they long to see.'"</span>

<span class="verse" id="v15"><sup class="verse-num">15</sup> The men that knew their wives were burning sacrifices to other gods and the women that were standing by—including a large number from Pathros—answered Jeremiah, 16"We don't have to listen to you! 17We'll keep burning sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and pouring out liquid offerings to her like we and our ancestors, our kings and officials did in Judah and Jerusalem. We were well off then with plenty of food and no misfortune. 18Since we stopped doing that, we've lacked everything and met our end by sword and famine." 19The women said, "When we were burning sacrifices to her, pouring out liquid offerings to her, and making sacrificial cakes in her image, didn't our husbands know it?"</span>

<span class="verse" id="v20"><sup class="verse-num">20</sup> Jeremiah responded, 21"Didn't Yahveh know about the smoking sacrifices you and your ancestors, kings and officials, and common people burned? 22He wouldn't put up with your sinful deeds and detestable acts anymore. So your land has become a ruin, abhorred, a curse, and uninhabited. 23This catastrophe has fallen on you because you've burned sacrifices and sinned against him, and didn't obey him or follow his Law, statutes, or testimonies. [24] 25You and your wives have said, 'We'll keep our vows to burn sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and pour out liquid offerings to her.' Go ahead and keep your vows! 26But listen to what Yahveh says, 'I've sworn by my great name that nobody from Judah that's in Egypt will ever invoke my name again, "As the Lord Yahveh lives . . ." 27I'll see to it that they're harmed. They'll meet their end by sword and famine. 28Only a few will ever make it back to Judah. Then the remnant in Egypt will know whose message will stand, theirs or mine. 29-30This is how you'll know: I'll punish you here too and deliver Pharaoh Hophra [Apries] to his enemies like I turned Zedekiah over to Nebuchadnezzar.'"</span>
