---
book: Exodus
chapter: 22
next: chapter-23
prev: chapter-21
title: Exodus 22
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 22
---

## Exodus Chapter 22

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> If someone steals a cow or sheep, slaughters it or sells it, he has to pay five cows for one cow and four sheep for one sheep. 3bIf he doesn't have anything, sell the thief for the theft. 4If what was stolen is found alive in the thief's possession—cow, donkey, or sheep—the thief will pay double.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v2"><sup class="verse-num">2</sup> If a thief gets caught breaking in at night and is struck and dies, the slayer won't be held guilty of murder.  3aIf the theft happens during the day, the slayer will be guilty of murder. 5"If you overgraze a field or vineyard and let an animal loose that grazes in someone else's field, you'll pay compensation from the best of your own field and vineyard. 6"If your fire gets away from you and spreads to someone else's thorn bushes, stacked grain, standing grain, or field, you'll pay for damages. 7"If you give someone money or goods for safekeeping, and it's stolen from that person's house, if caught, the thief will pay double. 8If no thief is caught, the judges will investigate to see if the other person took it. 9"For any breach of trust—for ox, donkey, sheep, clothing, or anything else a person owns—both parties will go to the judges. The one the judges find guilty will pay double to the other. 10"If you give someone a donkey, cow, sheep, or other animal for safekeeping and it dies, gets hurt, or wanders off unnoticed, 11the two of you will swear in Yahveh's presence that neither has taken it. You'll accept the judges' verdict, no compensation required. 12But if it was stolen, the thief will pay its owner for it. 13If wild animals got it, the remains are evidence, no compensation required. 14"If you borrow something that gets injured or dies while its owner's absent, you'll make full restitution. 15If its owner's present, you won't make compensation. If you rented it, it came for the rent. Laws About Social Justice 16"If a man seduces a virgin that's not engaged and lies with her, he has to pay a dowry for her to be his wife. 17If her father refuses to give her to him, he'll still pay money equal to the dowry for virgins. 18"Don't let a sorceress live. 19"Execute whoever has sexual relations with an animal. 20"Execute whoever sacrifices to any god but Yahveh. 21"Don't wrong or mistreat a foreigner; you were foreigners in Egypt. 22"Don't abuse a widow or orphan in any way. 23If you do and the person cries out to me, 24my anger will flare. I'll kill you with the sword and make yoursg wives widows and your children orphans. 25"If you lend money to the poor among my people, don't charge interest. 26If you take your neighbor's cloak as a pledge, give it back before sundown. 27That may be the only covering your neighbor has to sleep in. When your neighbor cries out to me, I'll listen, because I'm gracious. 28"Don't curse God or a ruler of your people.		      		29"Don't put off giving your offerings from your crops or vintage. "Give me your firstborn sons. 30Do the same thing with your cattle and sheep. After it's with its mother for a week, give it to me on the eighth day. 31"You'll be holy people to me. So don't eat any animal that's torn to pieces in the pasture by wild animals. Feed it to the dogs.</span>
