---
book: Exodus
chapter: 30
next: chapter-31
prev: chapter-29
title: Exodus 30
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 30
---

## Exodus Chapter 30

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Make an altar out of acacia wood as a place to burn incense: 218 x 18 x 36in with horns in one piece with it. 3Overlay it with pure gold on its sides, top, and horns; make a molding around it. 4On two sides put two gold rings under its molding on opposite ends for carrying it. 5Make the poles out of acacia wood overlaid with gold. 6Put the altar in front of the curtain that's near the Ark of Testimony—in front of the mercy seat that's on top of the Ark—where I'll meet you. 7-8Aaron will burn fragrant incense on it every morning and evening and trim the lamps. Burn incense to me continuously throughout your generations. 9Don't offer foreign incense, burnt offering, or meal offering on this altar. Don't pour any liquid offering on it. 10Throughout your generations, Aaron will make atonement on its horns once a year with the blood of the sin offering. It's most holy to me. Atonement Money [11] 12"When you take a census of the Israelites, each one will give a ransom for himself to Yahveh so there won't be any plague among them. 13-14Each person that's counted from 20 years up will give .2 oz a half-shekel of the sanctuary as a contribution to Yahveh (20 gerahs to a shekel). 15Rich and poor will contribute the same .2 oz a half-shekel of to make atonement. 16Give it for the service of the Tent of Meeting as a memorial to Yahveh. Bronze Basin for Washing [17] 18"Make a bronze laver with a bronze base, put it between the Tent of Meeting and the altar, and put water in it. 19Aaron and his sons will wash their hands and feet from it 20when they go into the Tent of Meeting so they won't die when they approach the altar to offer up in smoke a sacrifice by fire to meY.  21That will be an ongoing statute for Aaron and his descendants. Anointing Oil [22] 23"Take the finest spices: 12½ lbs 500 shekels of liquid myrrh, 6¼ lbs 250 shekels of fragrant cinnamon, 6¼ lbs 250 shekels of fragrant cane, 2412½ lbs 500 shekels of cassia, and 1½ gallons hin of olive oil. 25From them, make a holy anointing oil, a perfume mixture, a perfumer's work. 26With it, anoint the Tent of Meeting, the Ark of Testimony, 27the table and its utensils, the lampstand and its utensils, the altar of incense, 28the altar of burnt offering and its instruments, and the laver and its stand. 29Consecrate them so they'll be holy. Whatever touches them will be holy. 30Anoint Aaron and his sons to consecrate them for performing service to me as priests. 31Tell the Israelites, 'This will be a holy anointing oil to me throughout your generations. 32Don't make any oil like it in the same proportions or pour it on anybody else. It's holy, reserved for you. 33Whoever mixes any oil like it or puts any of it on a layman, will be excluded from the community.'" Incense 34"Take the spices stacte, onycha, galbanum, and pure frankincense in equal amounts 35to make incense, a perfumer's work—salted, pure, and holy. 36Beat some of it very fine and put part of it in front of the Testimony in the Tent of Meeting, where I'll meet you. It will be most holy to you. 37Any incense you make for yourselves can't have the same proportions. My incense will be exclusively for Yahveh. 38Whoever makes any perfume like it will be excluded from his people. Bezalel and Oholiab</span>
