---
title: "John 16:32b"
date: '2017-03-19'
author: "Virgil Warren, christir.org"
categories:
- Ministry
- Communion Meditations
- '2017'
draft: false
---

<p><em>“I am not alone because the Father is with me.”</em></p>
<p>A genuine leader must be willing to stand alone when necessary. That feature played out in the extreme in Christ’s bringing in the “kingdom” of God. As the distinctives of his work drew toward their conclusion, he found himself alone. His own disciples scattered when the Shepherd was struck, and they did so despite their resolve <em>“even to die with him”</em> (Matthew <strong>26</strong>:35).</p>
<p>From time to time, we find ourselves in the minority side, or even more extreme—alone. <em>“</em><em>These are the times that try men’s souls,</em><em>”</em> to see what mettle they’re made of. In regard to the things of God, the things of Christ, the things of the body of Christ in this world, it’s almost a given that his people are a minority, a remnant, even individually alone.</p>
<p>When we find ourselves in such a circumstance, God waits to see whether we will keep our commitments without being afraid or ashamed. The bailout in such cases is also covered by the words of the Lord. Not only does he say, <em>“I am alone,”</em> he has <em>“but I am not alone because the Father is with me.”</em> To incorporate the words of Paul, <em>“If God is for me, who can be against me?”</em></p>
<p>Among all the things associated with our participation in communion today, this bread and this fruit of the vine represent what standing alone may cost, but it also affirms our willingness to pay the price like he did.</p>
