---
book: Luke
chapter: 12
next: chapter-13
prev: chapter-11
title: Luke 12
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 12
---

## Luke Chapter 12

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Meantime, the thousands in the crowd that had been following him were so packed together they were stepping on each other. Jesus started saying to his disciples first, "Watch out for the yeast from the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. 2Everything covered up will be uncovered; everything hidden will be discovered. 3What youpl say in the dark will be heard in the light; what youpl whisper in the storerooms will be shouted from the housetops. 4"Friends, don't be afraid of people that can kill the body and that's all they can do. 5I'll show you who to be afraid of: the One with the right to kill you and throw you into hell. Yes, be afraid of him. 6Don't 5 sparrows cost 2 assarions? And God doesn't forget about a one of them. 7The very hairs on your head are numbered. Don't be afraid; you're worth more than lots of sparrows. 8"Everyone that acknowledges me to other people, I'll acknowledge to God's angels. 9Whoever denies who I am in front of other people I'll deny in front of God's angels. 10Everyone that slanders me can be forgiven, but whoever blasphemes the Holy Spirit won't be forgiven. 11"When they take you in front of synagogues, rulers, and authorities, don't worry about what to say to defend yourselves. 12The Holy Spirit will teach you at the time what to say."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v13"><sup class="verse-num">13</sup> A fellow in the crowd said, "Rabbi, tell my brother to split the inheritance with me."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v14"><sup class="verse-num">14</sup> Jesus said, "Sir, who appointed me to act as a judge or arbitor in yourpl affairs?" 15"Guard against every kind of greed; even in abundance a person's life doesn't consist of what he owns."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v16"><sup class="verse-num">16</sup> He told the crowd a parable, "A rich man's ground produced a bumper crop. 17He deliberated what to do because he didn't have enough room to put up his crop. 18He said, 'This is what I'll do: I'll tear down my barns and build bigger ones so I can store all my grain and good things. 19I'll tell myself, "You have a lot of good things for years to come. Rest, eat, drink, celebrate."' 20God said, 'You foolish man! Tonight they'll demand your life; who will these things belong to then?' 21That's how it is with people that store up for themselves and aren't rich toward God."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v22"><sup class="verse-num">22</sup> He said to his disciples, "So don't worry about your life what you're going to eat or for your body what you're going to wear. 23Life is more than food, and the body is more than clothes. 24Think about black birds; they don't sow or reap; they don't have a storeroom or barn. God feeds them. You're worth a lot more than birds! 25Which of you by worrying can add 18 inches to your height? 26If you can't do such a small thing, why worry about the rest? 27Consider how lilies grow; they don't work hard or spin, but even Solomon in all his splendor wasn't dressed like one of them. 28If God "dresses" the plants in the field that way—here today, burned tomorrow—how much more will he dress you, people with little faith. 29Don't concentrate on what you're going to eat, and don't worry. 30Material things are what Gentiles desire. Your Father knows you need them. 31Seek out his kingdom, and material things will come along with it. 32You don't need to be afraid, little flock. Your Father delights in giving you the kingdom. 33Sell what you own and give it to charity. Make money bags that don't wear out, never-ending wealth in heaven, where thieves don't steal and moths don't ruin. 34Your heart will be where your wealth is. 35"Be dressed and ready with your lamps lit 36like servants waiting for their master to come back from a wedding so they can open the door when he knocks. 37Blessed are the servants their master finds watching. He'll put on servant's clothes, have them recline at table, and wait on them. 38If he comes in the second watch or even the third and finds them ready, they're blessed. 39Be sure of this: if the homeowner had known what time the thief would come, he wouldn't have let him break into his house. 40You be ready because the Son of Man will come when you don't expect him."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v41"><sup class="verse-num">41</sup> Peter said, "Are you telling us that parable or everybody?"</span>

<span class="verse" id="v42"><sup class="verse-num">42</sup> He said, "Who's a wise, reliable property manager that his master puts in charge of providing meals at the right time? 43Blessed is the servant that his master finds doing his job when he comes. 44He'll put him in charge of everything he owns. 45"If that servant says to himself, 'It'll be a long time before my master gets back'; and he starts beating on the other servants, men and women, eating and getting drunk, 46the master will come on a day he doesn't expect him at a time he doesn't know, he'll flog him severely, and assign him the fate of disbelievers. 47"The servant that knew his master's will and wasn't ready or didn't act accordingly will get many lashes. 48The one that didn't know and committed things that deserve lashes will get few lashes. A lot will be expected of everybody that receives a lot. People ask more from somebody they've entrusted with more. 49"I came to set the earth on fire, and I wish it was already lit! 50I have a baptism to be baptized with, and I'm under duress till it's done. 51Do you think my coming will bring peace on earth? No, it'll bring division. 52From now on five members of a family will team up three against two and two against three: 54He told the crowd as well, "When you see clouds coming up in the west, right away you say, 'A storm's coming,' and you're right. 55When you see a south wind blowing, you say, 'It's going to get hot,' and it does. 56You foolish people, you can read earth and sky; why don't you know how to read the signs of the times? 57"Why can't you figure out what's right on your own? 58While you're on the way to court with your opponent, do your best to settle matters so he doesn't drag you in front of the judge, the judge turn you over to the officer of the court, and the officer put you in jail. 59You won't get out till you pay the last penny."</span>
