---
book: Ezekiel
chapter: 38
next: chapter-39
prev: chapter-37
title: Ezekiel 38
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 38
---

## Ezekiel Chapter 38

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> A message from Yahveh came to me: 2"Son of man, face Gog of the land of Magog, the prince that rules Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy against him, 3'The Lord Yahveh says, "I'm against you, Gog. 4I'll turn you around, put hooks in your jaws, and take you out—you, your army, horses and horsemen, all splendidly attired, a large army with buckler and shield, wielding swords; 5Persia, Nubia, and Put with them, all with shield and helmet; 6Gomer with all its troops; Beth-togarmah from the remote parts of the north with all its troops—many nations with you. 7"Be prepared, you and the armies allied with you as their commander. 8After a long time you'll be drawn to a land restored from the sword, whose residents live safely. They will have gathered from many nations to the mountains in Israel, which had been a continual waste. 9You and your troops will come down on them like a storm, like a cloud over the land." 10'The Lord Yahveh says, "At that time, you'll start plotting, 11'I'm going to go up against a land with unwalled villages, against people at rest, that live safely, that don't have walls, bars, and gates. 12I'll capture spoil, seize plunder, and attack waste places that are lived in now and people that gathered from the nations, who have acquired livestock and goods, and think the world revolves around them.' 13But Sheba, Dedan, the merchants of Tarshish and its surrounding villages, will ask you, 'Do you think the army you've gathered can capture lots of spoil, seize plunder and goods, carry off silver and gold, and drive away livestock?' 14"So, son of man, prophesy against Gog that the Lord Yahveh says, 'When my people are living securely, you'll know it, won't you? 15You'll come from the far north, riding horses, a great army 16swooping down like a cloud over the land. In the last days, Gog, I'll bring you against my land so the nations can see my holiness displayed by what happens to you.' 17'The Lord Yahveh says, "Aren't you the one I spoke about in former times through my prophets in Israel? They predicted for many years that I'd bring you against them. 18'When Gog comes against Israel, my fury will flare.' 19In my zeal and blazing anger, there will be a violent earthquake in Israel. 20Fish in the sea, buzzards in the sky, scavengers in the open country, things crawling on the ground, and everybody in the world will shudder at my presence. Mountains will crumble, cliffs will collapse, walls will crash to the ground. 21I'll call for a sword against Gog on all my mountains. His swordsmen will turn against each other. 22With disease and blood I'll render judgment on him: rain on him, his troops, and many allies, a torrential rain with hailstones, fire, and sulfur. 23I'll show my greatness, sanctify myself, make myself known where many nations can see me. They'll know I'm Yahveh."'</span>
