---
book: Ezekiel
chapter: 36
next: chapter-37
prev: chapter-35
title: Ezekiel 36
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 36
---

## Ezekiel Chapter 36

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Son of man, prophesy to the mountains of Israel, 'Listen to 2what the Lord Yahveh says, "Your enemy has ridiculed you, 'Ha!' and 'The everlasting mountains are ours now!'" 3So prophesy, 'For good reason other nations made you desolate and crushed you from every direction, took possession of you, and mocked and whispered.'" 4'So, mountains of Israel, listen to the message from the Lord Yahveh to the mountains and hills, ravines and valleys, desolate wastes and abandoned towns that have become prey and objects of derision. 5"In my burning jealousy, I've spoken against those nations, particularly Edom that took over my land with wholehearted joy and scornful attitude. I've sworn to drive it out to become prey. 6So prophesy to Israel's mountains and hills, ravines and valleys, "I've spoken in my anger because you've had to endure insults from other nations. 7I swear they will endure insults.'" 8"But you, mountains of Israel, will grow branches and bear fruit for my people, because they'll be coming back soon. 9I'll return to you, and you'll be cultivated and planted. 10People will multiple in Israel to live in the towns and rebuild the places in ruins. 11People and animals will reproduce in you. I'll make you lived-in like before and treat you better than at first. So you'll know I'm Yahveh. 12My people will carry on their lives in you and own you. You'll become their inheritance and never again bereave them of children." 13The Lord Yahveh says, 'Other nations tell you, "You've devoured your people and bereaved them of children," 14but you won't do that anymore. 15I won't let you listen to their insults anymore. You won't make your nation stumble anymore.'"</span>

<span class="verse" id="v16"><sup class="verse-num">16</sup> A message from Yahveh came to me: 17"Son of man, when Israel was living in their own land, they defiled it with their ways and deeds. Their way was unclean like a woman in her period. 18So I poured out my anger on them for the blood they'd shed, because they'd defiled the land with their idols. 19I scattered them among the nations and judged them by their ways and deeds. 20When they got to those nations, they profaned my holy name, because people said, 'These are Yahveh's people; yet they've come out of his land.' 21I was concerned about my holy name that they'd profaned among the nations. 22"So, tell Israel, 'It's not so much for your sake that I'm about to act; it's in regard to my holy name that you've profaned where you've gone. 23I'll vindicate the holiness of my great name. Then the nations will know I'm Yahveh." 24"I'll bring you back from the nations, 25sprinkle clean water on you to cleanse you from your filthiness and idols, 26and give you a new heart and spirit. I'll take out your stone heart and give you a physical one., 27and put my spirit in you so you'll follow my statutes and observe my ordinances. 28You'll live in the land I gave your ancestors. You'll be my people, and I'll be your God. 29I'll save you from your uncleanness, give you abundant crops of grain, and keep famine away from you. 30I'll multiply fruit on your trees and produce in the fields, 31You'll remember your sinful ways and deeds, and abhor yourselves. 32Understand that I'm not doing this because you deserve it. Be ashamed of yourselves, Israel!" 33"When I cleanse you from your sins, the towns will be rebuilt and lived in again. 34The land will be cultivated for everybody to see that goes by. 35They'll say, 'This wasteland has become like the orchard of Eden. The waste, desolate, ruined towns are fortified and lived in.' 36Then the nations that are left around you will know I've rebuilt the ruined places and planted what was desolate. I'll do what I've said." 37"The Lord Yahveh says, 'I'll let Israel ask me to increase their people like a flock. 38People's flocks will fill the wasted towns like sacrifices in Jerusalem at festival time. They'll know I'm Yahveh.'" A Valley of Dry Bones</span>
