---
book: Ezekiel
chapter: 43
next: chapter-44
prev: chapter-42
title: Ezekiel 43
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 43
---

## Ezekiel Chapter 43

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Then he led me to the east gate, 2and the glory of Israel's God was shining through it. His voice sounded like crashing water, and the earth radiated with his glory. 3The vision I saw was like the one when he came to destroy the city, like the one by the Chebar River. I fell on my face. 4The glory of Yahveh came into the Temple through the east gate. 5The Spirit lifted me up and took me to the inner court, and the glory of Yahveh filled the Temple.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v6"><sup class="verse-num">6</sup> While a man stood beside me, I heard someone talking to me from the Temple: 7"Son of man, this is the place for my throne and the soles of my feet, where I'll live among the people of Israel permanently. Israel and its kings won't defile my holy name anymore, either by their prostitution, by the dead bodies of their kings, 8or by setting their threshold by my threshold or their doorposts by my doorposts with only a wall between them and me. They've defiled my holy name with their disgusting deeds; so I've consumed them in my anger. 9Now they need to put their idolatry and their kings' dead bodies far away from me so I can live among them from now on. 10"Son of man, describe to Israel what the Temple and its layout look like so they'll regret their sins. 11If they regret everything they've done, then picture the Temple, its appearance, its exits and entrances, and its full layout. Show them its ordinances and laws. Write them down in their presence so they can observe them. 12This is the rule for the Temple: the whole area on top of the mountain will be most holy. The Altar 13"These are the measurements of the altar: the base will be a 20.7" 1 long cubit square with a 3.4" 1 handbreadth border. This will be the height: 14from the base on the ground to the lower ledge is 3' 5" 2 cubits, with a width 20.7" 1 cubit; from the smaller ledge to the large ledge is 6' 11" 4 cubits, with a width of 20.7" 1 cubit. 15The altar hearth will be 6' 11" 4 cubits; from the altar hearth projecting upward will be 4 horns 20.7" 1 cubit high. 16The altar hearth will be 20' 8" 12 cubits square. 17The ledge will be 24' 1" 14 cubits on four sides with a rim around it 10.3" ½ cubit wide and a base 20.7" 1 cubit wide all the way around. The altar's steps will face east." 18"He said to me, "Son of man, the Lord Yahveh says, 'These are the statutes at the time it's built, to offer burnt offerings on it and sprinkle blood on it. 19For a sin offering, give a young bull to the Levitical priests that have descended from Zadok, who come near to me to minister. 20Put some of its blood on the altar's four horns, on the four corners of the ledge, and on the border around it. Cleanse it and atone for it that way. 21Take the bull of the sin offering and burn it in the appointed place in the Temple outside the sanctuary. 22On the second day, offer a male goat without blemish for a sin offering. They're to cleanse the altar like they cleansed it for the bull. 23When you've finished cleansing it, present a young bull without blemish and a ram without blemish from the flock. 24Present them before Yahveh. The priests are to sprinkle salt on them and offer them up as a burnt offering to Yahveh. 25For a week each day prepare a goat for a sin offering, a young bull, and a ram from the flock without blemish. 26For a week atone for the altar and purify it to consecrate it. 27From the eighth day on, the priests are to offer your burnt offerings on the altar and your peace offerings; and I'll accept you.'" The Prince, Levites, and Priests</span>
