---
book: Ezekiel
chapter: 45
next: chapter-46
prev: chapter-44
title: Ezekiel 45
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 45
---

## Ezekiel Chapter 45

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> When you divide the land by lot for inheritance, allot to Yahveh, a holy district 8.2 x 3¼ miles 25,000 x 10,000 cubits; it will be holy throughout. 2Inside it will be a holy place 861' 500 cubits square with 86' 3" 50 cubits open all the way around it. 3Inside the district, set aside a section 8.2 x 3¼ miles 25,000 x 10,000 cubits for the sanctuary, the most holy place, 4the holy portion of the land. It will be for the priests, the ministers of the sanctuary who come near to minister to Yahveh, a place for their houses and a holy place for the sanctuary. 5Another section 8.2 x 3¼ miles 25,000 x 10,000 cubits will be for the Levites, the ministers of the Temple, and as their possession for towns to live in. 6Alongside the section designated as the holy district, assign for the possession of the city an area 1.63 x 8.2 miles 5,000 x 25,000 cubits. It will be for the whole House of Israel. 7"The prince will have land on both sides, alongside the holy district and the property for the city, on the west side and on the east side. Its length will correspond to one of the tribal portions and extend from the east to the west boundary of the land. 8He'll own it so my officials won't any longer oppress my people, but they'll give the rest of the land to the tribes of Israel. Warnings for the Princes 9"Stop it, officials of Israel! Stop evicting my people!  Stop violence and destruction. Practice justice and goodness. 10"Use accurate balances, ephahs, and baths. 11An ephah and a bath will be the same amount: .1 homer (4½ pecks/1.1 bushels). 12A shekel will equal 20 gerahs; 60 shekels will equal 1 mina. Offerings and Festivals 13"This is the offering you're to provide: .18 bushel ⅙ ephah from 11 bushels 1 homer of wheat, .18 bushel ⅙ ephah from 11 bushels 1 homer of barley; 14and the prescribed portion of oil (that is, bath  of oil), .9 gallon  .1 bath from each 90 gallons 1 cor (which is 10 baths, or a homer, because 10 baths equal 1 homer); 15and one sheep from each flock of 200 from the watering places of Israel—for a grain offering, a burnt offering, and a peace offering, to make atonement for them," the Lord Yahveh says. 16"All the general populace will give this offering for the prince. 17He will provide the burnt offerings, grain offerings, and liquid offerings for the festivals, new moons, and Sabbaths—at the stated festivals. He'll provide the sin offering, grain offering, burnt offering, and peace offering, to atone for Israel. 18"On the first day of the first month. take a young bull without blemish and purify the sanctuary. 19The priests will take blood from the sin offering and put it on the door posts of the Temple, on the four corners of the ledge of the altar, and on the posts of the gate of the inner court. 20He's to do that on the seventh of the month for everybody that goes astray or sins in ignorance to make atonement for the Temple. 21"On the fourteenth day of the first month, observe the Passover festival for a week; eat bread without yeast. 22On that day the prince will provide a bull for a sin offering for himself and the people. 23Each day of the festival he'll provide a burnt offering to Yahveh: 7 bulls and 7 rams without blemish, and 1 male goat for a sin offering. 24He'll provide a grain offering: 4½ pecks 1 ephah with each bull and ram, and 1½ gallons 1 hin of oil with each 4½ pecks l ephah. 25On the fifteenth day, seventh month, for the week of the festival, he'll provide sin offerings, burnt offerings, grain offerings, and oil."</span>
