---
book: Ezekiel
chapter: 7
next: chapter-08
prev: chapter-06
title: Ezekiel 7
translation: CYV
type: chapter
weight: 7
---

## Ezekiel Chapter 7

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> A message from Yahveh came to me: 2"Son of man, the Lord Yahveh says to Israel, 'The end is coming on the four corners of your land. 3I'll judge you by your ways, direct my anger at you, and bring your detestable things against you. 4I won't pity or spare when I bring on you the consequences of your deeds with the detestable things you've used.'  5A disaster—a unique disaster—is coming! 6The end is here! It has awakened against you! 7You're doomed, resident in the land—confusion instead of happy shouting on the mountains. [8] 9You'll know that I Yahveh am striking you. 10"The rod has budded, arrogance has blossomed, 11violence has grown into a rod of sinfulness. Nothing will remain of their multitude, their wealth, or anything outstanding that they have. 12The buyer shouldn't celebrate, the seller shouldn't mourn, because anger is aimed at their abundance. 13The seller won't regain what he sold as long as they're both alive, because the vision about their affluence won't fade away. Because of his sin, neither will live. 14"They've blown the bugle and everything's ready, but nobody is going to battle because I'm angry with this whole population. 15The sword's outside; famine and disease are inside. The ones out in the country will die by the sword; famine and disease will kill the ones in the city. 16Even when survivors escape, they'll be on the mountains like pigeons from the valley, mourning over his sinfulness. 17Hands will hang limp; knees will be like water. 18They'll put on burlap and shudder. Their faces will blush; their heads will be bald. 19They'll toss their silver into the streets and abhor their gold. Their silver and gold won't be able to deliver them from Yahveh's anger. They won't satisfy their hunger with it because that's what made them stumble. 20The beautiful jewels they were so proud of, they used for making detestable idols; so I'll turn their wealth into something detestable to them. 21I'll give them to foreigners as plunder, to the sinful as spoil; and they'll defile them. 22I'll look the other way while invaders profane my precious land. Robbers will go in and defile it 23and make it desolate.    	Ezek 7:14-23a "The land's filled with bloody crimes; the city's full of violence. 24So I'll bring the worst of the nations to take over their houses. I'll put an end to their proud strength and profane their holy places. 25When anguish comes, they'll look for peace, but there won't be any, 26just disaster on top of disaster, rumor on top of rumor. They'll find no vision from a prophet; the law will be lost from the priest and counsel from the elders. 27The king will mourn; the prince will put on rags; the people's hands will tremble. I'll deal with them by the way they've acted, judge them by their own judgments. They'll know I'm Yahveh'" Idolatry in the Temple</span>
