---
book: 2 Corinthians
chapter: 11
next: chapter-12
prev: chapter-10
title: 2 Corinthians 11
translation: WNT
type: chapter
weight: 11
---

## 2 Corinthians Chapter 11

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Oh-that you-would-bear-with me with-respect-to-some little foolishness; and indeed, do-bear-with me. 2For I-am-jealous-for you with-(a)-jealousy of-God, for I-joined┘you└in-marriage to-one husband to-present (you as a) pure virgin. 3But I-am-afraid lest somehow, as the snake deceived Eve with the treachery/craftiness of-him, the minds of-you should-be-led-astray from the simplicity [and [the] purity]ms [the] unto [the] Christ. 4For if the-one coming preaches another Jesus whom we-did┘not└preach, or you-receive (a) different spirit that you-did┘not└receive, or (a) different gospel that you-did┘not└receive, you-give-patient-attention-to (him). 5For I-reckon-myself with-respect-to-nothing to-be-inferior to-the outstanding apostles. 6But even if I-am unskilled in-[the] speech, [but] (I am) not in-[the] knowledge, but in every-way having-made┘(this)└manifest to-you in all-things.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v7"><sup class="verse-num">7</sup> Or did-I-commit (a) sin, humbling myself in-order-that you-might-be-exalted, because I-preached the gospel of-[the] God to-you free-of-charge? 8I-robbed other churches, having-taken wages (from them) for the ministry of-you; 9and, being-present with you and having-been-in-need, I-was┘not└ (a)-burden of-anybody; for the brothers, having-come from Macedonia, fully-supplied the need of-me, and in everything I-kept myself of-no-burden to-you and will-keep. 10(The) truth of-Christ is in me that this [the] boasting in me will┘not└be-silenced in me in the regions of-Achaia. 11On-account-of what? Because I-do┘not└love you? [The] God knows.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v12"><sup class="verse-num">12</sup> But what I-am-doing, I-will-do, in-order-that I-may-cut-off the opportunity of-the-ones desiring (an) opportunity [in-order-] that they-may-be-found as also we (are) in what they-boast. 13For [the] such (are) false-apostles of-Christ. 14And no wonder! For [the] Satan himself disguises himself unto (being an) angel of-light. 15So (it is) not (a) great-thing if the ministers of-him also disguise themselves as minsters of-righteousness, the end of-whom will-be according-to the deeds/works of-them.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v16"><sup class="verse-num">16</sup> Again I-say, nobody2 consider me foolish. But if (you do), receive me even as foolish, in-order-that I-also may-boast a little. 17What I-say, I-am┘not└speaking according-to the Lord, but as in foolishness, in this confidence of-[the] boasting. 18Since many are-boasting according-to the flesh, I-also will-boast. 19For you, being wise, gladly bear-with the foolish! 20For you-bear-with (somebody) if somebody enslaves you, if anybody devours (you), if somebody takes-advantage-of (you), if somebody puts-on-airs, if somebody slaps you in (the) face. 21I-speak to (my) dishonor/disgrace/shame as that we have-been-weak. But in whatever2 anybody is-bold (I-speak in foolishness), I-also am-bold. 22Are-they Hebrews?  I-too. Are-they Israelites? I-too. 23Are-they seed of Abraham? I-too. 23Are-they servants of-Christ? I-speak as-if-insane, I more. In labors more exceedingly, in prisons more often, in scourgings more-severely, in danger of) death many-times. 24By (the) Jews five-times I-received forty (lashes) minus one, 25three-times I-was-beaten-with-rods, once I-was-stoned, three–times I-was-shipwrecked, (a) night-and-day I-have-spent in the deep. 26(I have been) on-journeys often, in-dangers of rivers, in-dangers of-robbers, in-dangers of (my) countrymen, in-dangers of-Gentiles, in-dangers in (the) city, in-dangers in (the) desert, in-dangers in (the) sea, in-dangers among false-brothers. 27(I have been) in labor and hardship, in many sleeplessnesses, in hunger and thirst, in fastings many-times, in cold and nakedness/without-enough-clothes. 28Besides the external-things is the according-to-(the)-day [the] pressure-on me, the concern for-all the churches. 29Who is weak, and I-am┘not└weak? Who is-led-into-sin, and I do┘not└burn?</span>

<span class="verse" id="v30"><sup class="verse-num">30</sup> If it-is-necessary to-boast, I-will-boast in-the weaknesses of-me. 31The God and Father of-the Lord Jesus knows, the-One being blessed forever3, that I-am┘not└lying. 32In Damascus the ethnarch of-Aretas the king was-guarding the city of-(the)-Damascenes to-seize/arrest me, 35and I-was-let-down in (a) basket through (a) window through the wall and escaped-from the hands of-him.</span>
