---
book: 2 Corinthians
chapter: 12
next: chapter-13
prev: chapter-11
title: 2 Corinthians 12
translation: WNT
type: chapter
weight: 12
---

## 2 Corinthians Chapter 12

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> To-boast/boasting is necessary/appropriate, not profitable, but I-will-go to visions and revelations of-(the)-Lord. 2I-know (a) man in Christ before fourteen years, whether in (the) body I-do┘not└know, whether out-of the body I-do┘not└know; [the] God knows, [the] such having-been-caught to (the) third heaven. 3And I-know [the] such (a) man—whether in (the) body, whether outside the body I-do┘not└know; [the] God knows—4that he-was-caught-up to [the] Paradise and heard inexpressible words/things, not permitted/possible for-(a)-man to speak. 5On-behalf-of [the] such-(a man) I-will-boast, but on-behalf-of myself I-will┘not└boast except in [the]/(my) weaknesses. 6For if I-desire to-boast, I-will┘not└ be-foolish, for I-will-speak (the) truth. And I-refrain lest anybody will-count me above what he-sees me (to be) or hears [anything]ms from me 7and by the surpassing greatness of-the revelations. Wherefore, in-order-that I-might┘not└overly-exalt-myself, (a) thorn in-the-flesh was-given to-me, (a) messenger of-Satan, in-order-that it-might-beat me in-order-that I-might┘not└overly exalt myself. 8About this I-appealed-to the Lord three times in-order-that it-might-depart from me. 9And he-has-said to-me, "The grace of-me is-sufficient for-you, for [the] power [of-me]ms is-made-complete/reaches-its-highest-level in weakness." So, most-gladly I-will-boast instead in the weaknesses of-me, in-order-that the power of-[the] Christ might-live-in/might-rest-on me. 10Wherefore, I-am-content/delight with/in weaknesses, in mistreatments, in necessities, in persecutions and difficulties on-behalf-of Christ. For when I-am-weak, then I-am strong.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v11"><sup class="verse-num">11</sup> I-have-become foolish; you compelled me. For I-should have-been-commended by you. For in-respect-to nothing was-I-inferior to-the most-outstanding apostles although2 I-am nothing. 12The signs of-the/an apostle were-worked among you in all perseverance, with both signs and wonders and miracles. 13For in-respect-to-what is the-thing-which you-were-treated-worse than the other churches, unless2 that I myself did┘not└make-myself-a-burden to-you? Forgive me this [the] wrong/injustice! 14Behold, this (is) the-third-time I-have readily to-come to you, and I-will┘not└burden (you); for I-do┘not└seek the-things of-you, but you; for [the] children ought not to-treasure-up for-[the] parents, but [the] parents (treasure up) for-[the] children. 15But I will┘most gladly└spend and will-be-spent on-behalf-of the souls of-you. If I-love you more-abundantly, am-I-loved less? 16But let-it-be/be-that-as-it-may/anyhow, I-did┘not└burden you. But being crafty, I-took you by cunning! 17Not anybody of-whom I-have-sent to you, through him did-I-take-advantage-of you? 18I-urged Titus and have-sent┘the brother└with (him). Titus did┘not┘┘└take-advantage-of you, └└did-he? Did-we┘not└walk by the same spirit; (did we not walk) in-the same footsteps?</span>

<span class="verse" id="v19"><sup class="verse-num">19</sup> All-this-time/In-all-this are-you-thinking that we-are-defending-ourselves to-you. In-front-of God we-are-speaking in Christ, and [the] all-things, beloved, (we are speaking) on-behalf-of the edifying of-you, 20for I-fear lest somehow, having-come, I-may-find you not such-as I-want and-I may-be-found by-you such-as you-do┘not└want, lest somehow (there may be) rivalry, jealousy, angers/intense-feelings, disputes, slanders, gossips, arrogances/conceits, disturbances; 21lest again, I-having-come, the God of-me may-humiliate me with/in-front-of you, and I-may-mourn-over many of-the-ones having-sinned-before and not repented over the impurity and sexual-immorality and sensuality that they-practiced.</span>
