---
book: Ezekiel
chapter: 20
next: chapter-21
prev: chapter-19
title: Ezekiel 20
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 20
---

## Ezekiel Chapter 20

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> The tenth day, fifth month, seventh year, some of Israel's elders came to inquire from the LORD and sat in front of me. 2A message from him came to me: 3"Son of man, tell Israel's elders the Lord GOD says, 'Are you coming to inquire from me? As I live, I won't let you.' 4"Are you willing to judge them, son of man? Then remind them about their ancestors' detestable deeds. 5Tell them that when I chose Israel, swore to Jacob's descendants, and made myself known to them in Egypt, 6I swore I'd take them out of Egypt to a land I'd chosen, a land flowing with milk and honey, the most beautiful of all the lands. 7I told them to throw away the detestable things their eyes feasted on and not defile themselves with Egypt's idols. I'm the LORD their God. 8But they wouldn't discard them.     	Ezek 20:1-8a "So I resolved to pour out my anger on them in Egypt. 9I did it to keep my name from being profaned in the nations that I revealed myself to by bringing Israel out of Egypt. 10So I took them into the desert, 11and gave them my statutes and ordinances that would give people life if they kept them. 12I gave them my Sabbaths as a sign between us so they'd know I'm the LORD who sanctifies them. 13But Israel rebelled. So I resolved to pour out my anger on them in the desert and wipe them out. [14] 15I swore to them there that I wouldn't bring them to the land I'd given them. [16] 17Yet I didn't wipe them out in the desert. 	Ezek 20:8b-17 18"I told their children in the desert, 'Don't follow the statutes of your fathers, keep their ordinances, or defile yourselves with their idols. 19I'm the LORD your God: follow my statutes and keep my ordinances, 20sanctify my Sabbaths as a sign between us so you can know that I'm the LORD their God.' 21But the children wouldn't do it. 22I withdrew my hand to keep my name from being profaned in the nations that saw me bring them out of Egypt. 23I swore to them in the desert that I'd scatter them among the nations 24for their rebellion. 25I let them keep statutes that weren't good and ordinances that couldn't give life. 26I pronounced them unclean for making their firstborn pass through fire so I could make them desolate. 27"So, son of man, tell Israel the Lord GOD says, 'Your ancestors blasphemed me by acting deceitfully against me. 28When I did bring them to the land I swore to give them, they looked at every tall hill and leafy tree, and offered their sacrifices there and presented their provoking offerings. They made their soothing aroma and poured out their liquid offerings. 29Then I said to them, "What's the 'high place' that you go to?" Its name is still Bamah. 30So say to Israel the Lord GOD says, 'Will you defile yourselves like your ancestors did and carry on prostitution with their detestable things? 31When you offer your gifts—making your sons pass through fire—you're still defiling yourselves with your idols. Will you inquire from me, House of Israel? As I live, I won't let you. 32"What you imagine won't happen—as when you say you'll be like the nations and tribes in the lands and serve wood and stone.' 33"As I live, I'll rule you with a strong hand, outstretched arm, and anger poured out. 34From the lands where you're scattered, 35I'll take you to the wilderness of the nations and judge you directly 36like I judged your ancestors in the desert in Egypt. 37I'll make you pass evaluation and bring you into the covenant. 38I'll purge from you the rebels that sin against me. I'll bring you out of the land where you're living temporarily, but you won't enter Israel. So you'll know I'm the LORD. 39"Go on and serve your idols, Israel; later you'll listen. You won't profane my holy name anymore with your idols and offerings. 40-41"On my holy hill, Israel's high mountain, the whole House of Israel will serve me. Like a soothing aroma, I'll accept you there and seek your contributions and choice gifts with your holy things. I'll prove myself holy among you for the nations to see 42when I bring you to the land I swore to give your ancestors. 43You'll think back there to the ways you defiled yourselves, and you'll despise yourselves for the sins you've committed. 44You'll know I'm the LORD when I've dealt with you to maintain my reputation more than to punish your sins.'"</span>

<span class="verse" id="v45"><sup class="verse-num">45</sup> A message from the LORD came to me: 46"Son of man, face Teman. Prophesy against the south, against the forest in the Negev, 47'Listen to what the Lord GOD says, "I'm about to light a fire in you that will burn up every tree in you, green or dry. It won't go out till it has burned the whole surface from south to north. 48Everybody will see that I lit it."'"</span>

<span class="verse" id="v49"><sup class="verse-num">49</sup> Then I said, "Lord GOD, they're saying I'm just telling stories."</span>
