---
book: Ezekiel
chapter: 39
next: chapter-40
prev: chapter-38
title: Ezekiel 39
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 39
---

## Ezekiel Chapter 39

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> Son of man, prophesy against Gog, 'The Lord GOD says, "I'm against you, ruler of Meshech, and Tubal. 2I'll turn you around, drive you on, take you up from the most remote parts in the north, and bring you against Israel. 3I'll knock the bow out of your left hand and the arrows out of your right hand. 4-5You and your troops will fall on the mountains in Israel. I'll feed you to every vulture and wild animal in the open country. I've said so. 6I'll rain down fire on Magog and those who live securely in distant lands. They'll know I'm the LORD.' 7"I'll make my holy name known among my people; I won't let it be profaned anymore. The nations will know I'm the LORD, the Holy One in Israel. 8The day I'm talking about is coming; it will happen.' 9"For seven years, the people in the towns of Israel will go out and build fires with the weapons, shields and bucklers, bows and arrows, war clubs and spears. 10They won't get wood from the pasture or gather firewood from the woods; they'll build fires out of weapons and plunder the ones that plundered them,"				                      	the Lord GOD says. 11"When I give Gog a burial ground in Israel—in the valley east of the Dead Sea, it will block travelers. They'll bury Gog with all his army there and call it the Valley of Hamon-Gog. 12It will take Israel seven months of burying to clean up the land. 13The common people will do the burying to their renown when I glory myself," the Lord GOD says. 14"They'll appoint men to go through the land and bury the ones left on the ground. 15When they see a human bone, they'll put a marker by it till those who do the burying put it in the Valley of Hamon-Gog. 16The city's name will be Hamonah [Horde]. So they'll clean up the land." 17"Son of man, tell every bird and wild animal, 'Gather to the great sacrifice I'm going to make for you on the mountains in Israel so you can eat flesh and drink blood. 18You'll eat the flesh of powerful men and drink the blood of princes as if they were rams, lambs, goats, and bulls—grain-fed animals from Bashan. 19You'll eat till you're gorged and drink blood till you're drunk from the sacrifice I'll make for you. 20At my table you'll gorge on horses, charioteers, and mighty warriors,'"	 the Lord GOD says. 21"I'll demonstrate my honor among the nations. They'll see the judgment I've carried out on them. 22Israel will know I'm the LORD their God from then on. 23The nations will know Israel went into exile for their sin, and I hid from them. I abandoned them to their enemies, and they fell by the sword. [24]"'"</span>

<span class="verse" id="v25"><sup class="verse-num">25</sup> So the Lord GOD says, "Now I'll restore Jacob's fortunes and have mercy on the whole House of Israel. I'll be zealous for my holy name. 26When they live securely in their own land with nobody to threaten them, they'll forget their shame and unfaithfulness to me. 27When I bring them back from the nations, they'll sanctify me in a way many lands can see. 28They'll know I'm the LORD their God because I exiled them and then gathered them back. I won't leave any of them there. 29I won't hide from them anymore because I've poured out my Spirit on Israel."</span>
