---
book: Numbers
chapter: 15
next: chapter-16
prev: chapter-14
title: Numbers 15
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 15
---

## Numbers Chapter 15

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> The LORD told Moses to tell Israel, 2"When you go into the land I'm giving you, 3make a burnt offering to me—a sacrifice to fulfill a special vow, a free-will offering, at your scheduled times. Make a pleasing aroma from the herd or flock. 4"When you present your offering, present a grain offering made from .11 bushel .1 ephah of fine flour mixed with 3 pints ¼ hin of olive oil.  5Prepare wine for the liquid offering, 3 pints ¼ hin, with the burnt offering or sacrifice, for each lamb. 6"For a ram, prepare as a grain offering .22 bushel .2 ephah of fine flour mixed with ⅓⅓ him of olive oil. 7For a liquid offering, offer ⅓ gallon ⅓ hin of wine as an aroma pleasing to the LORD. 8"When you prepare a bull as a burnt offering or sacrifice—to fulfill a special vow or for peace offerings to the LORD —9offer it with a grain offering made from .33 bushel .3 ephah of fine flour mixed with 3 quarts ½ hin of olive oil. 10Offer as the liquid offering 3 quarts ½ hin of wine as an offering by fire, as an aroma pleasing to the LORD. 11That's the way it's to be done for each ox, ram, male lamb, or goat, 12the same for each sacrifice. 13"Every citizen of you will do those things when you present an offering by fire, as an aroma pleasing to the LORD. 14If foreigners staying with you—temporarily or permanently—want to make an offering by fire, they'll do it the same way you do. 15-16There'll be one statute, one law, one ordinance for you and for foreigners among you throughout your generations." "When you go into the land where I'm taking you 19and you eat the food that's there, lift up an offering to the LORD.   20-21From the first of your dough, lift up a cake as an offering from the threshing floor. 22-23"When the whole community unintentionally fails to observe any commandment, 24they'll offer 1 bull for a burnt offering (as an aroma pleasing to the LORD, with its grain offering and liquid offering) and 1 male goat for a sin offering. 25The priest will atone for the whole community because they brought the offering to the LORD for their error. 26He'll forgive the community, including any foreigner among them, since it wasn't intentional. 27"If one of you sins unintentionally, offer a year-old female goat for a sin offering. 28The priest will atone for you in front of the LORD. 29For doing something unintentionally, there'll be one law for a native and a foreigner. 30"But if you do something intentionally, native or foreign, you're blaspheming the LORD. You'll be excluded from the community. 31Your guilt will remain because you've disregarded the LORD's message and broken his commandment."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v32"><sup class="verse-num">32</sup> When Israel was in the desert, they found a fellow gathering wood on the Sabbath. 33They brought him to Moses, Aaron, and the community. 34They put him in custody because it hadn't been specified what should happen to him. 35The LORD told Moses, "Execute him. Have the community stone him outside the camp." 36The community took him outside the camp and stoned him.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v37"><sup class="verse-num">37</sup> The LORD also said to Moses, 38"Tell Israel to make tassels for the hems of their cloaks throughout their generations. Put a blue cord on the tassel for each corner. 39When you see it, remember to do everything the LORD commands instead of doing what's in your own mind and thereby becoming a prostitute. 40Set yourselves apart to your God. 41I'm the LORD who brought you out of Egypt to be your God."</span>
