---
end_topic: 153
next: ../section-27
prev: ../section-25
reference: Jn 12:20-50; Mt [10:17-22a] 24:1-51; Mk 13:1-36; Lk 21:5-36; Mt 25:1-13;
  ...
section: 26
start_topic: 149
title: The Olivet Discourse
type: harmony-section
weight: 26
---

<div id="sermon-on-the-significance-of-life-and-death" class="harmony-topic">
<h3 class="topic-header">Sermon on the Significance of Life and Death</h3>
<p class="topic-reference">(Jn 12:20-50)</p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">	20Some that went up to worship at the festival were Greeks. 21They came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida in Galilee, “Sir, we’d like to see Jesus.” </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">	22Philip went and spoke to Andrew, and the two of them spoke to Jesus.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">	23Jesus answered them, </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">“It’s time to honor the Son of Man. 24Unless a grain of wheat falls to the ground and dies, it’s all there is. But if it dies, it yields a lot of grain. 25Whoever loves his life will lose it, and whoever looks on past his life in the world will keep it for eternal life. 26If anybody serves me, he needs to follow me, and he’ll be where I am. If anybody serves me, the Father will honor him.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">		27“I’m torn now: Will I say, ‘Father, save me from this hour’? But this </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">is why I came to this hour. 28Father, honor your name.”</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">	A voice came out of the sky, “I’ve honored it, and I’ll honor it again.” </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">	29The crowd standing there heard it and said it had thundered.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">	Others said, “An angel spoke to him.”</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">	30Jesus responded, “That voice didn’t come so much for my sake as yours. 31Now is the judgment of this world; now the ruler of this world will be thrown out. 32If I’m lifted up from the ground, I’ll draw everybody to me.” (33He said this to indicate how he would die.) </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">	34The crowd responded, “We’ve heard out of the law that Messiah is forever. How do you say the Son of Man has to be lifted up? Who is this ‘Son of Man’?”</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">	35Jesus said, “The light’s still among you for a little while. Walk while you have it so darkness doesn’t overtake you. A person that’s walking in the dark can’t tell where he’s going. 36While you have light, believe in it so it will enlighten you.” Jesus said all that, and went away and hid.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">	37Despite doing so many signs in front of them, they were not believing in him—38as in the words of Isaiah the prophet,</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">“LORD, WHO HAS BELIEVED OUR REPORT, AND</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn"> 	WHO HAS THE ARM OF THE LORD BEEN REVEALED TO?” </span><span class="gospel-mt">[Is 53:1]</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">39Here’s the reason they couldn’t believe: Isaiah said again, </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">40“HE BLINDED THEIR EYES, AND </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">     	HARDENED THEIR HEART, </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">SO THEY COULDN’T SEE WITH THEIR EYES, AND</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">	        	UNDERSTAND WITH THEIR HEART, AND</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">		  	BE CONVERTED, AND </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">  	I WOULD HEAL THEM” </span><span class="gospel-mt">[Is 6:10].</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">41Isaiah said this because he saw Messiah’s glory and talked about him. 42Nevertheless a number even of the rulers did believe in him, but because of the Pharisees they didn’t admit it, and get excommunicated from membership in the synagogue. 43They loved honor from men more than honor from God.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">	44Jesus shouted, </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-jn">“Whoever believes in me doesn’t just believe in me, but in the One that sent me. 45Whoever sees me sees the One that sent me. 46I’ve come to the world as a light so nobody that believes in me will be in the dark. 47I don’t condemn anybody for not keeping what he hears me say. I didn’t come to condemn the world, but to save it. 48Whoever rejects me has something that does condemn him in the end: the message I’m delivering. 49I haven’t spoken on my own. The Father has told me what to say. 50I know what he says leads to eternal life; so I say what he told me to say.”		   </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">The Olivet Discourse </span></p>
</div>

<div id="the-olivet-discourse" class="harmony-topic">
<h3 class="topic-header">The Olivet Discourse</h3>
<p class="topic-reference">(Mt [10:17-22a] 24:1-51; Mk 13:1-36; Lk 21:5-36)</p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">	24:1Jesus was leaving the temple when his disciples came to show him the buildings of the temple complex. One disciple said, “Rabbi, look at the wonderful buildings that are </span><span class="gospel-lk">decorated with beautiful stones and memorial gifts.”</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-lk">	He said, </span><span class="gospel-mt">2“See these things? </span><span class="gospel-lk">The time’s coming when </span><span class="gospel-mt">these great buildings will not be left here one stone on another.”</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">	When he was sitting on the Mount of Olives across from the temple, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately, </span><span class="gospel-lk">“Rabbi, </span><span class="gospel-mt">tell us when this will happen, and what will show that it’s about to happen? 3What will be the sign that you’re coming and the end of the age.”</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">	Jesus told them, </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">4“Make sure nobody deceives you. 5Many will come, saying, ‘I’m the Messiah,’ </span><span class="gospel-lk">and, 8‘The time has come,’ </span><span class="gospel-mt">and they’ll deceive lots of people. </span><span class="gospel-lk">Don’t follow them.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text">	<span class="gospel-mk">7</span><span class="gospel-mt">“When you hear about wars and reports about wars </span><span class="gospel-lk">and rebellions, </span><span class="gospel-mt">don’t </span><span class="gospel-mk">panic</span><span class="gospel-mt">. They need to happen, but that’s not the end yet. 8Nation will attack nation and kingdom will attack kingdom. There’ll be famines and </span><span class="gospel-lk">violent </span><span class="gospel-mt">earthquakes in various places, </span><span class="gospel-lk">11and plagues, dreadful events, and great signs from the sky.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text">	<span class="gospel-mk">9</span><span class="gospel-mt">“Be on guard yourselves. They’re the beginning of labor pains. </span><span class="gospel-lk">Before all this, they’ll persecute you and arrest you. </span><span class="gospel-mt">They’ll make trouble for you; </span><span class="gospel-mk">they’ll</span><span class="gospel-mt"> flog you in the synagogues, and deliver you up to the courts </span><span class="gospel-lk">and prisons.</span> <span class="gospel-lk">16Friends, relatives, and parents will betray you, and put some of you to death. </span><span class="gospel-mt">Nations will hate you. You’ll stand in front of governors and kings to testify to them and the nations. </span><span class="gospel-lk">13Those times will provide opportunities for you to testify. </span><span class="gospel-mk">10The good news needs to reach all the countries first.</span>   </p>
<p class="harmony-text">	<span class="gospel-mk">11</span><span class="gospel-mt">“When they arrest you and deliver you up, </span><span class="gospel-lk">be determined not to prepare your defense ahead of time. </span><span class="gospel-mt">Don’t worry about how or what you’ll say. </span><span class="gospel-lk">I’ll give you what to say </span><span class="gospel-mt">at the time </span><span class="gospel-lk">and wisdom that none of your opponents can argue with. </span><span class="gospel-mt">You’ll not be the ones speaking; it’ll be the Holy Spirit of your Father speaking in you. </span><span class="gospel-lk">Not a hair of your head will perish.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">	10“Many will fall away and betray one another and hate one another. </span><span class="gospel-mk">12</span><span class="gospel-mt">Brother will betray brother to death, and father will betray child. Children will rise up against parents and have them put to death. 11“Many false prophets will arise and deceive people. 12Since lawlessness will increase, many people’s love will grow cold. 13But, the one that endures to the end will be saved. </span><span class="gospel-lk">19You’ll gain your life by enduring.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-lk">	20“When you see Jerusalem being surrounded by armies </span><span class="gospel-mt">and 15‘the abomination of desolation,’ spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place, positioned where it shouldn’t be [reader, understand], 16people in Judaea need to flee to the hill country. </span><span class="gospel-lk">21People in the city need to leave; the ones in the countryside must not go in the city. 22This is a time of revenge to fulfill the scriptures. 24This people will fall by the sword and be taken captive into the nations. Gentiles will trample Jerusalem underfoot until the times of the Gentiles are over.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">17“Whoever’s on the housetop must not go down to pick up things from his house. 18Whoever’s in the field must not go back to get his cloak. 19Woe to the ones that are pregnant and nursing babies then! 20Pray that your flight won’t happen in winter or on the Sabbath. Great distress will come on the land and wrath on this people. 21That time will be the worst ever—from the beginning of God’s creation till now or will ever be. 29If the Lord hadn’t shortened it, nobody would have survived. But, because of the chosen ones, he has shortened it. </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text">	<span class="gospel-mk">23</span><span class="gospel-mt">“Be on guard. I’ve told you all this ahead of time.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">	“As I said before, 23then if anybody says, ‘Here’s the Messiah,’ or, ‘There’s the Messiah,’ don’t believe it. 24False messiahs and false prophets will arise and give great signs and wonders that could deceive, if possible, even the chosen ones. [25] 26If people tell you, ‘He’s in the desert,’ don’t go out. ‘He’s in private quarters,’ don’t believe it. 27As lightning flashes from the east to the west, that’s the way the actual coming of the Son of Man will be. 28Where the carcass is, the buzzards will gather.	</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">	29“Immediately after that tribulation, </span><span class="gospel-lk">25there’ll be signs in the sun, moon, and stars: </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text">		<span class="gospel-mt">the sun will grow dark,</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">		the moon won’t shine,</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">		stars will fall, and</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">		the powers of the heavens will be shaken.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">30Then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in the sky. </span><span class="gospel-lk">25There’ll be distress among the nations, in despair at the roaring of the sea. 30</span><span class="gospel-mt">All the tribes on earth will mourn. </span><span class="gospel-lk">26People will faint from fear and foreboding over what’s coming on the world. 27People will </span><span class="gospel-mt">see </span><span class="gospel-lk">‘THE SON OF MAN COMING ON A CLOUD</span><span class="gospel-mt"> [Dan 7:13] </span><span class="gospel-lk">with great power and glory.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text">	<span class="gospel-lk">28“When these things start to happen, look up; your deliverance is on its way. </span><span class="gospel-mk">27</span><span class="gospel-mt">He’ll send out his angels to gather the chosen ones from every direction, from the end of the earth to the end of the sky.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">	28“Take a lesson from a fig tree </span><span class="gospel-lk">or any tree. As soon as </span><span class="gospel-mt">its branches become tender and sprout leaves, you </span><span class="gospel-lk">see it for yourselves and </span><span class="gospel-mt">know summer’s coming. 29</span><span class="gospel-mk">The same way, </span><span class="gospel-mt">when you see these things happening, you know </span><span class="gospel-lk">God’s kingdom is </span><span class="gospel-mt">near—at the door. 30They’ll take place in this generation. Earth and sky will pass away, but what I say won’t pass away.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">	36“But nobody knows about that day and hour, not the angels in heaven, not the Son of Man, only the Father. 37As it was in Noah’s day, it will be when the Son of Man comes. 38In the time before the flood, people were eating and getting married till Noah went in the ark. 39They didn’t realize what was going to happen till the flood came and carried them all away.	</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">	“That’s the way the coming of the Son of Man will be. 40Two men will be in the field; one will be taken and the other left. 41Two women will be grinding at the mill; one will be taken and the other left.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text">	<span class="gospel-lk">34“Be on guard so pleasures, drunkenness, and the cares of life don’t make you insensitive, and that day comes on you unexpectedly 35like a trap. It’ll come on everybody on earth. 36Stay alert all the time. Pray so you’ll be strong enough to get away from everything that’s coming, and to stand in front of the Son of Man.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text">	<span class="gospel-mk">34</span><span class="gospel-mt">“Be like a man that’s leaving on a trip, and gives each servant the authority to do his job, and commands the doorkeeper to be alert. 35Watch, because you don’t know when the lord of the house will come back—in the evening, at midnight, at rooster crowing, or in the morning; 36so if he comes suddenly, he won’t catch you sleeping. </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">	43“Do know this: if the homeowner had known in what watch the thief would come, he would’ve been on the alert and wouldn’t have let him ransack his house. 44So you be ready too; the Son of Man will come when you least expect it. </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">	“45Who then is the smart and faithful servant that his master has put in charge of feeding his household on time? 46Blessed is the servant whose master finds him doing that when he comes. 47He’ll put him in charge of everything he owns. 48But if an evil servant says to himself, ‘My master won’t be coming for a long time’; 49and he starts abusing his fellow servants and eating and getting drunk with drunkards, 50his master will come on a day he doesn’t expect, at a time he doesn’t know, 51and he’ll severely punish him and assign him a place with hypocrites. There’ll be bitter crying and gnashing of teeth there.	</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text">	<span class="gospel-mk">37</span><span class="gospel-mt">“What I’m saying I’m saying to all of you. Watch!	  </span></p>
</div>

<div id="the-parable-of-the-ten-virgins" class="harmony-topic">
<h3 class="topic-header">The Parable of the Ten Virgins</h3>
<p class="topic-reference">(Mt 25:1-13)</p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">25:1“The kingdom of heaven at that time will be like ten virgins that took their lamps to meet the groom. 2Five were foolish, and five were wise. 3When the foolish took their lamps, they didn’t take any oil along. 4The wise took along some oil in flasks with their lamps. 5The groom was slow coming, and they all got drowsy and went to sleep. 6At midnight the shout came, ‘The groom! Come out to meet him!’ 7Then those virgins got up and trimmed their lamps. </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">8“The foolish said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil; our lamps are going out.’ </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">9“The wise said, ‘No, there won’t be enough for us all. Go to the dealers and get your own.’ 10While they were gone, the groom arrived. The ones that were ready went in with him to the wedding feast, and the door was locked. 11Later, the rest of the virgins came, ‘Lord, lord, open the door.’ 12But he answered, ‘I don’t know you.’ 13So, be alert, because you don’t know the day or the hour.”  				    </span></p>
</div>

<div id="the-parable-of-the-talents" class="harmony-topic">
<h3 class="topic-header">The Parable of the Talents</h3>
<p class="topic-reference">(Mt 25:14-30)</p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">14“The kingdom of heaven is like a man about to leave on a trip. He called his servants and entrusted them with things he owned. 15He gave five talents to one, two talents to another, and one talent to another—according to their abilities. 16At once the one that received five talents traded with them and earned five more. 17The one that received two talents did the same thing and earned two more. 18But the servant that received one talent dug a hole in the ground and hid his lord’s talent.</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">19“After a long time the lord came back and settled accounts with them. 20The one that had received five talents came with five more, “Lord, you entrusted me with five talents; I’ve earned five more.’ </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">21“‘Well done, good, dependable servant. You were dependable in a few things; I’ll put you in charge of many. Enter your master’s joy.’</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">22“The one that had received two talents came up, ‘Lord, you entrusted me with two talents; I’ve earned two more.’</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">23“‘Well done, good, reliable servant. You were reliable in a few things; I’ll put you in charge of many. Enter your master’s joy.’</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">24“But the servant that had received one talent came up, ‘Lord, I knew you were a hard man. You reap where you didn’t sow and gather where you didn’t scatter. 25I was afraid and hid your talent in the ground. You have what’s yours.’</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">26“‘You wicked, lazy servant. You knew, did you, that I reap where I don’t sow and gather where I don’t scatter? 27You should’ve taken my money to the bankers. When I came back, I would’ve received back what was mine plus interest. 28Take the talent away from him and give it to the one with ten.  29Everybody that has will receive more; but the one that doesn’t have will lose even what he does have. 30Throw the worthless servant out in the dark. There’ll be bitter weeping and gnashing of teeth out there.	   		   						   </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">Discussion of the Final Judgment </span></p>
</div>

<div id="discussion-of-the-final-judgment" class="harmony-topic">
<h3 class="topic-header">Discussion of the Final Judgment</h3>
<p class="topic-reference">(Mt 25:31-46)</p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">31“When the Son of Man comes in his glory with the angels, he’ll sit on his glorious throne. 32The nations will be in front of him, and he’ll separate them like a shepherd separates sheep from goats. 33He’ll put the sheep on his right and the goats on his left. 34The king will say to the sheep on his right, ‘Come, you blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you since the founding of the world. 35I was hungry, and you gave something to eat. I was thirsty, and you gave me something to drink. I was a foreigner, and you gave me a place to stay. 36 I needed clothes, and you gave me some. I was sick, and you took care of me. I was in prison, and you visited me.’</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">37“Then good people will say, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink? 38When did we see you a foreigner and give you a place to stay, or needing clothes and give you some? 39When did we see you sick or in prison and take care of you?’</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">40“The king will answer, ‘When you did it for one of these least brothers of mine, you did it for me.’</span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">41“Then he’ll say to the ones on the left, ‘Go, you accursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels. 42I was hungry, and you didn’t give me anything to eat. I was thirsty, and you didn’t give me anything to drink. 43I was a foreigner, and you didn’t give me any place to stay. I needed clothes, and you didn’t give me any. I was sick and in prison and you didn’t take care of me.’ </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">44Then they’ll say, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry, thirsty, a stranger, needing clothes, sick, or in prison, and not help you?’ </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">45“He’ll answer, ‘Since you didn’t do it for one of these least brothers, you didn’t do it for me either.’ 46Those will go away into eternal punishment, but the good people into eternal life.” 		   </span></p>
<p class="harmony-text"><span class="gospel-mt">Fifth Prediction of Jesus’ Death </span></p>
</div>
