---
book: Ezra
chapter: 7
next: chapter-08
prev: chapter-06
title: Ezra 7
translation: CNT
type: chapter
weight: 7
---

## Ezra Chapter 7

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> After that, in the reign of Artaxerxes, king of Persia, came Ezra son of Seraiah (son of Azariah son of Hilkiah 2son of Shallum son of Zadok son of Ahitub 3son of Amariah son of Azariah son of Meraioth 4son of Zerahiah son of Uzzi son of Bukki 5son of Abishua son of Phinehas son of Eleazar) son of Aaron the chief priest. 6Ezra, a scribe, an expert in the Law of Moses, came up from Babylon. The king granted him everything he requested because the LORD's hand was on him. 7Some Israelites, priests, Levites, singers, gatekeepers, and Temple servants came up to Jerusalem in the seventh year of King Artaxerxes. [8] 9On the first day, first month, Ezra started out from Babylon. On the first day, fifth month he arrived at Jerusalem because God's good hand was on him. 10He had set his heart on studying the Law of the LORD, practicing it, and teaching its statutes and ordinances in Israel.		  Ezra 7:1-10</span>

<span class="verse" id="v11"><sup class="verse-num">11</sup> The Decree King Artaxerxes Gave Ezra the Priest and Scribe, 12"Artaxerxes, king of kings, to Ezra, priest and scribe of the Law of the God of heaven, greeting. 13"I've decreed that any of the Israelites, their priests, and Levites in my kingdom that want to go to Jerusalem, can go with you. 14The king and his seven advisors have sent you to ask about Judah and Jerusalem according to the Law of your God that you have with you. 15They've sent you as well to take the silver and gold that the king and his advisors have freely offered to the God of Israel, who lives in Jerusalem. 16That's accompanied by all the silver and gold you'll find in the whole province of Babylon, along with the freewill offering by the people and priests that donated for their God's Temple in Jerusalem. 17With this money diligently buy bulls, rams, and lambs, with their grain offerings and liquid offerings, and offer them on the altar in the Temple of your God. 18Whatever seems good to you and your brothers to do with the rest of the silver and gold, you can do according to the will of your God. 19To the God in Jerusalem deliver in full the utensils you've received for the service of your God's Temple. 20The rest of the needs for his Temple that you have occasion to provide for, do so from the royal treasury.    	                             Ezra 7:11-20 21"I, King Artaxerxes, decree to the treasurers in Beyond the River, that you provide diligently whatever Ezra requires from you, 22up to 7550 lbs 100 talents of silver, 1100 bushels 100 kors of wheat, 900 gallons 100 baths of wine, 900 gallons 100 baths of olive oil, and salt as needed. 23Whatever the God of heaven commands, do with zeal for his Temple so there won't be any anger against the realm of the king and his sons. 24We also inform you not to impose tax, tribute, or toll on any of the priests, Levites, singers, doorkeepers, Nethinim, or workmen in that Temple of God. 25And you, Ezra, according to the wisdom of your God that's available to you, appoint magistrates and judges in Beyond the River who know the laws of your God. You can teach anybody that doesn't know them. 26On whoever doesn't observe the Law of your God and the law of the king, carry out judgment strictly, whether by death, banishment, confiscation of possessions, or imprisonment."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v27"><sup class="verse-num">27</sup> Bless the LORD God of our ancestors, who has put such a thing in the king's heart, to adorn the LORD's Temple in Jerusalem. 28He has extended enduring love to me in the presence of the king, his advisors, and powerful officials. In that way the LORD gave me courage, and I assembled leading men from Israel to go up with me.		  Ezra 7:21-28</span>
