---
book: Acts
chapter: 26
next: chapter-27
prev: chapter-25
title: Acts 26
translation: WNT
type: chapter
weight: 26
---

## Acts Chapter 26

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> And Agrippa said to [the] Paul, "It-is-permitted to-you to-speak for yourself." Then [the] Paul, having-stretched-out the/his hand, began-to-speak-on-his-own–behalf/began-to-make-his-defense: 2"Concerning all-the-things of-which I-am-being-accused by (the) Jews, King Agrippa, I-consider myself fortunate about to-make-my-defense to you today, 3especially you being (an) expert/familiar-with both all the customs and disagreements according-to (the) Jews. Wherefore I-beg-of-you to-hear me patiently. 4So all the Jews know [the] my manner-of-life from (my) youth [the] spent from (the) beginning in [the] my nation and in Jerusalem, 5knowing-beforehand for-a-long-time, if they-are-willing to-testify, that according-to the strictest sect of-[the] our religion, I-lived (as a) Pharisee. 6And now over the hope of-the promise of-the fathers of-us, becoming/having-happened by [the] God, I-stand, being-judged, 7unto which the twelve-tribe (group) of-us hopes to-attain, serving night and day in earnestness, concerning which hope I-am-being-accused, King. 8Why is-it unbelievable with you whether [the] God raises (the) dead? 9I then supposed it-to-be-necessary for-myself to-practice many-things contrary to the name of Jesus the Nazarene, 10and this-thing I-did in Jerusalem and both many of-the saints I locked-up in prison, having-received [the] authority from the high-priests and, they being-condemned-to-death, I-cast┘(my) lot└against (them). 11And according-to all the synagogues many-times, having (them) punished, I-tried-to-make them blaspheme, and being┘all-the-more insanely└furious with-them, I-would-persecute (them) even unto [the] foreign cities. 12"In which-things traveling to[the] Damascus with authority and commission [the] of-the high-priests, 13during-(the)-middle of-day along the road, I-saw, King, from-(the)-sky above the brightness of-the sun (a) light shining-around me and the-ones traveling with me. 14We all having-fallen-down onto the ground, I-heard (a) voice speaking to me in-the Hebrew dialect, 'Saul, Saul, why are-you-persecuting me? (It is) hard for-you to-kick at (the) goad.' 15And I said, 'Who are-you, Sir?' And the Lord said, 'I am Jesus whom you are-persecuting. 16But stand-up and stand on the feet of-you. For to this I-appeared to-you: to-hand-pick you (as a) minister and witness of-the-things both you-saw and of-the-things I-will-show you, 17deliverinig you from the people and from the Gentiles to whom I am-sending you, 18to-open (the) eyes of-them, to┘[the]└turn (them) from darkness into light and (from) the power of-[the] Satan to [the] God, and (an) inheritance in the-ones sanctified by-faith [the] in me.' 19"Whence, King Agrippa, I-did┘not└prove-disobedient to-the heavenly vision, 20but both to-the-ones in Damascus first and Jerusalem and all the country of-[the] Judaea and the Gentiles I-kept-declaring to-repent and turn to [the] God, practicing works/deeds worthy of-[the] repentance. 21On-account-of these-things Jews, seizing me [being]ms in the temple, were-attempting to-kill-me-by-hand. 22So having-obtained help [the] from [the] God until [the] this day, I-stand testifying to-smallsg and greatsg, and saying nothing except what-things the prophets and Moses said would be, 23whether the Messiah, subject-to-suffering, whether first by/from (the) resurrection of-(the)-dead would proclaim light both to-the people and to-the Gentiles."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v24"><sup class="verse-num">24</sup> Now he defending-himself with-respect-to-these-things, [the] Festus says with-the/a loud voice, "Paul, you-are-mad. The many learnings are-making you into madness/insanity."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v25"><sup class="verse-num">25</sup> And [the] Paul says, "I-am┘not└mad/insane, most-excellent Festus, but I-am-speaking words of-truth and sobermindedness/good-sense. 26For the king knows about these-things to whom also I-speak being-bold, because I-am┘not└persuaded that any of-these-things to-escape him for this has┘not└been-done in (a) corner. 27King Agrippa, do-you-believe the prophets? I-know that you-believe."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v28"><sup class="verse-num">28</sup> And [the] Agrippa (said) to [the] Paul, "With little/a-little do-you-persuade me to-make (me a) Christian./?"</span>

<span class="verse" id="v29"><sup class="verse-num">29</sup> And [the] Paul (said), "Oh-that2 to-[the] God both in/with little and with/in much, not only you but also all the-ones listening-to me today, to-become such-as2 I also am except of-[the] these bonds."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v30"><sup class="verse-num">30</sup> And the king stood-up and the governor and [the] Bernice and the-ones sitting-with them; 31and, having-withdrawn, started-saying to one-another, "Nothing worthy of-death or bonds is┘[the] this man └doing."</span>

<span class="verse" id="v32"><sup class="verse-num">32</sup> And Agrippa said to-Festus, "[The] this man was-able to-have-been-released/freed if he had┘not└appealed to Caesar."</span>
