---
book: Acts
chapter: 7
next: chapter-08
prev: chapter-06
title: Acts 7
translation: WNT
type: chapter
weight: 7
---

## Acts Chapter 7

<span class="verse" id="v1"><sup class="verse-num">1</sup> And the high-priest said [whether], "Are these-things thus/so?"</span>

<span class="verse" id="v2"><sup class="verse-num">2</sup> And the/he said, "Men brothers and fathers, listen. The God of-[the] glory appeared to-Abraham the father of-us being in [the] Mesopotamia before2 his dwelling in Haran, 3and said to him, 'Go-out from the land of-you and from the relative(s) of-you, and go into the land that2 I-will-show you.' 4And having-gone-out from (the) land of-(the)-Chaldeans, he-settled in Haran. And from-there after the father of-him [the] having-died, he-moved him into [the] this land in which we now dwell, 5and he-did┘not└give him (an) inheritance in it not-even (a) space of-(the)-foot and promised to-give it to-him for possession and to-the seed of-him after him, (an) offspring not being to-him. 6And so [the] God said [that], 'The seed of-him will-be (a) sojourner in (a) foreign land and they-will-enslave it and mistreat it for-four-hundred years. 7And the nation to-which they-will-be-slaves I will-judge, says [the] God, and after these-things they-will-come-out, and they-will-serve me in [the]this place.' 8And he-gave to-him (the) covenant of-circumcision, and so he-begot [the] Isaac and circumcised him on-the eighth [the] day. And Isaac (begot) [the] Jacob, and Jacob (begot) the twelve patriarchs. 9"And the patriarchs, having-been-jealous-of [the] Joseph, sold (him) into Egypt and [the] God was with him. 10And he-delivered him out-of all the afflictions of-him, and gave grace and wisdom before Pharaoh, king of-Egypt and [over]ms all the household of-him. 11And (a) famine came on the whole-of Egypt and Canaan and great affliction, and the fathers of-us were┘not└finding food/fodder. 12And Jacob, having-heard grain[s] being in Egypt, sent the fathers of-us first. 13And in the second Joseph made-himself-known to-the brothers of-him, and the family of-[the] Joseph became apparent to-[the] Pharaoh. 14And Joseph, having-sent-away, summoned Jacob the father of-him and all the kin/relatives, in souls seventy five. 15And Jacob went-down into Egypt, and he and the fathers of-us died, 16and they-were-removed into Shechem and were-put in the tomb that Abraham bought for-(the)-price of-silver from the sons of Hamor in Shechem.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v17"><sup class="verse-num">17</sup> And even-as the time of-the promise came-near that [the] God assured [the] Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt 18until2 another king arose over Egypt, who did┘not└know [the] Joseph. 19This-one, having-taken-advantage-of the race of-us, mistreated the fathers [of-us]ms [the] to-make (them) expose the babies of-them unto [the] not allowing-(them)-to-live; 20at which time Moses was born and he-was handsome to-[the] God, who was-nourished for-three months in the house of-the/his father. 21And he having-been-exposed the daughter of-Pharaoh took-him-up and nourished him for-himself for (a) son. 22And Moses was-educated in all wisdom of-(the)-Egyptians, and he-was capable in his words and deeds.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v23"><sup class="verse-num">23</sup> And when (a) forty-years' time was-fulfilled to-him, it-went-up in the heart of-him to-visit the brothers of-him, the sons of-Israel. 24And having-seen a-certain-one being-mistreated, he-came-to-help, and took vengeance for-the-one being-oppressed, striking-down the Egyptian. 25And he-was-supposing the brothers of-him understood that [the] God through (the) hand of-him was-giving salvation to-them. But the-ones/they did┘not└understand.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v26"><sup class="verse-num">26</sup> And on the next day he-appeared to-them fighting and tried-to-reconcile them into peace, saying, "Men, you-are brothers; why are-you-harming one-another?"</span>

<span class="verse" id="v27"><sup class="verse-num">27</sup> And the-one mistreating the/his neighbor pushed┘him└away, saying, "Who established you as-(a)-rule and judge over us? 28You do┘not┘┘└want to-kill me which way you-killed the Egyptian yesterday, └└do-you?"</span>

<span class="verse" id="v29"><sup class="verse-num">29</sup> And Moses fled at [the] this word, and became (a) sojourner in (the) land of-Midian, where he-begat two sins.</span>

<span class="verse" id="v30"><sup class="verse-num">30</sup> And forty years having-been-fulfilled, (an) angel appeared to-him in (a) flame of-fire of-(a)-thorn-bush in the desert of-the mountain of-Sinai. 31And [the] Moses, having-seen, he-was-being-amazed-at the sight, and he going-forward-to-(it) to-observe, (the) voice of-the Lord came, 32'I (am) the God of-the fathers of-you, the God of-Abraham and Isaac and Jacob.' And Moses having-become trembly, he-was┘not└daring to-observe. 33'And the Lord said to-him, 'Take-off the sandal of-the feet of-you, for the place on which you-are-standing is holy ground. 34I┘certainly└saw the mistreatment of-the people of-me in Egypt, and I-heard the groaning of-them; and I-went-down to-deliver them; and come now I-will-send you into Egypt.' 35This [the] Moses, whom they-denied, saying, 'Who appointed you (a) ruler and judge?' This-one [the] God sent [both]ms as-(a)-ruler and deliverer with the hand of-(the)-angel the-one having-appeared to-him in the bush. 36This-one led┘them└out, having-done wonders and signs in (the) land of-Egypt and in (the) Red Sea and in the desert forty years. 37This is the Moses the-one having-said to-the sons of-Israel, '(A) prophet [the] God will-raise-up to-you out of the brothers of-you like me.' 38This is the-one having-been in the congregation in the desert with the angel [the] speaking to-him in the mountain of-Sinai and the fathers of-us who received living oracles to-give to-us; 39to-whom the fathers of-us did┘not└want to-become obedient, but rejected and in the hearts of-them turned-back to Egypt, 40saying to-[the] Aaron, 'Make gods for us the-ones going-before us, for [the] this Moses who brought us out of the land of-Egypt—we-do not know what has-happened to-him.' 41And in [the] those days they-made-(a)-calf and brought (a) sacrifice to-the idol and were-rejoicing in the works of-the hands of-them. 42And [the] God turned-away and delivered┘them└over to-serve the host of-the sky even-as it-has-been-written in (the) book of-the prophets,</span>

<span class="verse" id="v42"><sup class="verse-num">42</sup> And you-took-along the tabernacle of-[the] Moloch</span>

<span class="verse" id="v44"><sup class="verse-num">44</sup> The tabernacle of-[the] testimony was to-the fathers of-us in the desert even-as the-One speaking to-[the] Moses commanded him to-make it according-to the type/pattern that he-had-seen, 45which also the fathers of-us, having-received, brought in with Joshua in the taking-possession of-the nations, whom [the] God drove-out from (the) face of-the fathers of-us until the days of-David, 46who found grace before [the] God and he-asked to-find (a) tabernacle for-the house of-Jacob. 47And Solomon built (a) house for him. 48But the Most-High does┘not└dwell in handmade (things/houses), even-as the prophet says,</span>

<span class="verse" id="v50"><sup class="verse-num">50</sup> Did┘not└the hand of-me make all these-things?"' 51Stiff-necked and uncircumcised in-hearts and [the] ears, you always resist the Holy Spirit [the] Spirit, as the fathers of-you (did) you also. 52Which of-the prophets did┘the fathers of-you not└persecute? And they-killed the-ones having-announced-ahead-of-time concerning the coming of-the Righteous-One, of-whom now you became betrayers and murderers, 53who received the Law at (the) commandment of-angels and did┘not└keep (it)." 54And hearing these-things, they-became-furious in-the hearts of-them and began-to-gnash the/their teeth at him. 55And being full of-(the)-Hoy Spirit, having-stared into [the] heaven, he-saw (the) glory of-God and Jesus standing on (the) rightpl of-[the] God; 56and said, "Behold I-observe the heavens opened and the Son of-[the] man standing on (the) rightpl of-[the] God." 57And having-shouted-out with-(a)-loud voice, they-covered the ears of-them, and rushed together at him; 58and having-put (him) outside the city, they-began to-stone (him) and the witnesses put the clothes of-them beside the feet of-(a)-young-man called Saul. 59And they-began to-stone [the] Stephen, calling-on (the Lord) and saying, "Lord Jesus, receive the spirit of-me." 60And having-put the knees, he-shouted with-(a)-loud voice, "Lord, do┘not└put this [the] sin against-them." And having-said this, he-fell-asleep.</span>
